<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Jewish Theology</title>
      <author><name reg="Kohler, Kaufmann">Kaufmann Kohler</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>June 6, 2010</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">32722</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2010-06-06">June 6, 2010</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This book was produced from scanned images of public
            domain material from the Google Print project.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Jewish Theology</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Systematically and Historically Considered</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Dr. K. Kohler</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">President</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Hebrew Union College</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">The Macmillan Company</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1918</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Dedication</head>

<p>
To The Memory
</p>

<p>
Of
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Edward L. Heinsheimer</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Lamented President of the
Board of Governors of</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Hebrew Union College</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>In Whom Zeal for the High Ideals</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>of Judaism and Patriotic Devotion</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>to Our Blessed Country Were</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Nobly Embodied</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>In Friendship And</l>
<l>Affection</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface</head>

<p>
In offering herewith to the English-reading public the present
work on Jewish Theology, the result of many years of
research and of years of activity as President and teacher at
the Hebrew Union College of Cincinnati, I bespeak for it that
fairness of judgment to which every pioneer work is entitled.
It may seem rather strange that no such work has hitherto
been written by any of the leading Jewish scholars of either
the conservative or the progressive school. This can only be
accounted for by the fact that up to modern times the Rabbinical
and philosophical literature of the Middle Ages sufficed
for the needs of the student, and a systematic exposition of
the Jewish faith seemed to be unnecessary. Besides, a real
demand for the specific study of Jewish theology was scarcely
felt, inasmuch as Judaism never assigned to a creed the
prominent position which it holds in the Christian Church.
This very fact induced Moses Mendelssohn at the beginning
of the new era to declare that Judaism <q>contained only
truths dictated by reason and no dogmatic beliefs at all.</q>
Moreover, as he was rather a deist than a theist, he stated
boldly that Judaism <q>is not a revealed religion but a revealed
law intended solely for the Jewish people as the vanguard of
universal monotheism.</q> By taking this legalistic view of
Judaism in common with the former opponents of the Maimonidean
articles of faith&mdash;which, by the way, he had himself
translated for the religious instruction of the Jewish youth&mdash;he
exerted a deteriorating influence upon the normal development
of the Jewish faith under the new social conditions.
The fact is that Mendelssohn emancipated the modern Jew
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
from the thraldom of the Ghetto, but not Judaism. In the
Mendelssohnian circle the impression prevailed, as we are
told, that Judaism consists of a system of forms, but is substantially
no religion at all. The entire Jewish renaissance
period which followed, characteristically enough, made the
cultivation of the so-called science of Judaism its object, but
it neglected altogether the whole field of Jewish theology.
Hence we look in vain among the writings of Rappaport,
Zunz, Jost and their followers, the entire Breslau school, for
any attempt at presenting the contents of Judaism as a system
of faith. Only the pioneers of Reform Judaism, Geiger,
Holdheim, Samuel Hirsch, Formstecher, Ludwig Philippson,
Leopold Stein, Leopold Loew, and the Reform theologian <hi rend='italic'>par
excellence</hi> David Einhorn, and likewise, Isaac M. Wise in
America, made great efforts in that direction. Still a system
of Jewish theology was wanting. Accordingly when, at the
suggestion of my dear departed friend, Dr. Gustav Karpeles,
President of the Society for the Promotion of the Science of
Judaism in Berlin, I undertook to write a compendium (Grundriss)
of Systematic Jewish Theology, which appeared in 1910
as Vol. IV in a series of works on Systematic Jewish Lore
(Grundriss der Gesammtwissenschaft des Judenthums), I had
no work before me that might have served me as pattern or
guide. Solomon Schechter's valuable studies were in the main
confined to Rabbinical Theology. As a matter of fact I accepted
the task only with the understanding that it should be
written from the view-point of historical research, instead of a
mere dogmatic or doctrinal system. For in my opinion the
Jewish religion has never been static, fixed for all time by an
ecclesiastical authority, but has ever been and still is the result
of a dynamic process of growth and development. At the
same time I felt that I could not omit the mystical element
which pervades the Jewish religion in common with all others.
As our prophets were seers and not philosophers or moralists,
<pb n='ix'/><anchor id='Pgix'/>
so divine inspiration in varying degrees constituted a factor of
Synagogal as well as Scriptural Judaism. Revelation, therefore,
is to be considered as a continuous force in shaping and
reshaping the Jewish faith. The religious genius of the Jew
falls within the domain of ethnic psychology concerning which
science still gropes in the dark, but which progressive Judaism
is bound to recognize in its effects throughout the ages.
</p>

<p>
It is from this standpoint, taken also by the sainted founder
of the Hebrew Union College, Isaac M. Wise, that I have written
this book. At the same time I endeavored to be, as it
behooves the historian, just and fair to Conservative Judaism,
which will ever claim the reverence we owe to our cherished
past, the mother that raised and nurtured us.
</p>

<p>
While a work of this nature cannot lay claim to completeness,
I have attempted to cover the whole field of Jewish belief,
including also such subjects as no longer form parts of the
religious consciousness of the modern Jew. I felt especially
called upon to elucidate the historical relations of Judaism
to the Christian and Mohammedan religions and dwell on the
essential points of divergence from them. If my language at
times has been rather vigorous in defense of the Jewish faith,
it was because I was forced to correct and refute the prevailing
view of the Christian world, of both theologians and others,
that Judaism is an inferior religion, clannish and exclusive,
that it is, in fact, a cult of the Old Testament Law.
</p>

<p>
It was a matter of great personal satisfaction to me that the
German work on its appearance met with warm appreciation
in the various theological journals of America, England, and
France, as well as of Germany, including both Jewish and
Christian. I was encouraged and urged by many <q>soon to make
the book accessible to wider circles in an English translation.</q>
My friend, Dr. Israel Abrahams of Cambridge, England, took
such interest in the book that he induced a young friend of his
to prepare an English version. While this did not answer the
<pb n='x'/><anchor id='Pgx'/>
purpose, it was helpful to me in making me feel that, instead of
a literal translation, a thorough revision and remolding of the
book was necessary in order to present it in an acceptable English
garb. In pursuing this course, I also enlarged the book
in many ways, especially adding a new chapter on Jewish
Ethics, which, in connection with the idea of the Kingdom of
God, appeared to me to form a fitting culmination of Jewish
theology. I have thus rendered it practically a new work.
And here I wish to acknowledge my great indebtedness to my
young friend and able pupil, Rabbi Lee J. Levinger, for the
valuable aid he has rendered me and the painstaking labor he
has kindly and unselfishly performed in going over my manuscript
from beginning to end, with a view to revising the
diction and also suggesting references to more recent publications
in the notes so as to bring it up to date.
</p>

<p>
I trust that the work will prove a source of information
and inspiration for both student and layman, Jew and non-Jew,
and induce such as have become indifferent to, or prejudiced
against, the teachings of the Synagogue, or of Reform
Judaism in particular, to take a deeper insight into, and look
up with a higher regard to the sublime and eternal verities
of Judaism.
</p>

<p>
<q>Give to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser; teach a
righteous man, and he will increase in learning.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cincinnati</hi>, November, 1917.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introductory</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. The Meaning of Theology</head>

<p>
1. The name Theology, <q>the teaching concerning God,</q>
is taken from Greek philosophy. It was used by Plato and
Aristotle to denote the knowledge concerning God and things
godly, by which they meant the branch of Philosophy later
called Metaphysics, after Aristotle. In the Christian Church
the term gradually assumed the meaning of systematic exposition
of the creed, a distinction being made between
<emph>Rational</emph>, or <emph>Natural Theology</emph>,
on the one hand, and <emph>Dogmatic
Theology</emph>, on the other.<note place='foot'>Compare Heinrici
<hi rend='italic'>Theologische Encyclopaedie</hi>, p. 4; Enc. Brit.
art. Theology.</note> In common usage Theology is
understood to be the presentation of one specific system of
faith after some logical method, and a distinction is made
between <emph>Historical</emph> and <emph>Systematic Theology</emph>. The former
traces the various doctrines of the faith in question through
the different epochs and stages of culture, showing their historical
process of growth and development; the latter presents
these same doctrines in comprehensive form as a fixed
system, as they have finally been elaborated and accepted
upon the basis of the sacred scriptures and their authoritative
interpretation.
</p>

<p>
2. Theology and Philosophy of Religion differ widely in
their character. Theology deals exclusively with a specific
religion; in expounding one doctrinal system, it starts from
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
a positive belief in a divine revelation and in the continued
working of the divine spirit, affecting also the interpretation
and further development of the sacred books. Philosophy
of Religion, on the other hand, while dealing with the same
subject matter as Theology, treats religion from a general
point of view as a matter of experience, and, as every philosophy
must, without any foregone conclusion. Consequently
it submits the beliefs and doctrines of religion in general to
an impartial investigation, recognizing neither a divine revelation
nor the superior claims of any one religion above any
other, its main object being to ascertain how far the universal
laws of human reason agree or disagree with the assertions
of faith.<note place='foot'>Heinrici, l. c., p. 14 f., 212;
Hagenbach-Kautsch: <hi rend='italic'>Encyc. d. theolog. Wiss.</hi>,
p. 28-30; Rauwenhoff: <hi rend='italic'>Religionsphilosophie</hi>,
Einl., xiii; Margolis: <q>The
Theological Aspect of Reformed Judaism,</q> in Yearbook of C. C. A. R., 1903,
p. 188-192. Lauterbach, J. E., art. Theology.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. It is therefore incorrect to speak of a Jewish religious
philosophy. This has no better right to exist than has Jewish
metaphysics or Jewish mathematics.<note place='foot'>See, however, Geiger:
<hi rend='italic'>Nachgel. Schriften</hi>, II, 3-8; also Margolis, l. c.,
p. 192-196.</note> The Jewish thinkers
of the Spanish-Arabic period who endeavored to harmonize
revelation and reason, utilizing the Neo-Platonic philosophy
or the Aristotelian with a Neo-Platonic coloring, betray by
their very conceptions of revelation and prophecy the influence
of Mohammedan theology; this was really a graft
of metaphysics on theology and called itself the <q>divine
science,</q> a term corresponding exactly with the Greek <q>theology.</q>
The so-called Jewish religious philosophers adopted
both the methods and terminology of the Mohammedan
theologians, attempting to present the doctrines of the Jewish
faith in the light of philosophy, as truth based on reason.
Thus they claimed to construct a Jewish theology upon the
foundation of a philosophy of religion.
</p>

<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>

<p>
But neither they nor their Mohammedan predecessors
succeeded in working out a complete system of theology.
They left untouched essential elements of religion which do
not come within the sphere of rational verities, and did not
give proper appreciation to the rich treasures of faith deposited
in the Biblical and Rabbinical literature. Nor does the
comprehensive theological system of Maimonides, which
for centuries largely shaped the intellectual life of the Jew,
form an exception. Only the mystics, Bahya at their head,
paid attention to the spiritual side of Judaism, dwelling at
length on such themes as prayer and repentance, divine
forgiveness and holiness.
</p>

<p>
4. Closer acquaintance with the religious and philosophical
systems of modern times has created a new demand for a
Jewish theology by which the Jew can comprehend his own
religious truths in the light of modern thought, and at the
same time defend them against the aggressive attitude of the
ruling religious sects. Thus far, however, the attempts made
in this direction are but feeble and sporadic; if the structure
is not to stand altogether in the air, the necessary material
must be brought together from its many sources with painstaking
labor.<note place='foot'>A fine beginning in this direction has been made by Professor
Schechter in <hi rend='italic'>Some Aspects of Rabbinic Theology</hi>, New York,
1909.</note> The special difficulty in the task lies in the
radical difference which exists between our view of the past
and that of the Biblical and medieval writers. All those
things which have heretofore been taken as facts because related
in the sacred books or other traditional sources, are viewed
to-day with critical eyes, and are now regarded as more or
less colored by human impression or conditioned by human
judgment. In other words, we have learned to distinguish
between <emph>subjective</emph> and <emph>objective</emph> truths,<note place='foot'>See
Joel: <q>D. Mosaismus u. d. Heidenthum,</q> in Jahrb. f. Jued. Gesch.
und Lit., 1904, p. 70-73.</note> whereas theology by
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
its very nature deals with truth as absolute. This makes
it imperative for us to investigate historically the leading
idea or fundamental principle underlying a doctrine, to note
the different conceptions formed at various stages, and trace
its process of growth. At times, indeed, we may find that
the views of one age have rather taken a backward step and
fallen below the original standard. The progress need not be
uniform, but we must still trace its course.
</p>

<p>
5. We must recognize at the outset that Jewish theology
cannot assume the character of <emph>apologetics</emph>, if it is to accomplish
its great task of formulating religious truth as it exists
in our consciousness to-day. It can no more afford to ignore
the established results of modern linguistic, ethnological,
and historical research, of Biblical criticism and comparative
religion, than it can the undisputed facts of natural science,
however much any of these may conflict with the Biblical
view of the cosmos. Apologetics has its legitimate place
to prove and defend the truths of Jewish theology against
other systems of belief and thought, but cannot properly
defend either Biblical or Talmudic statements by methods
incompatible with scientific investigation. Judaism is a
religion of <emph>historical</emph> growth, which, far from claiming to be
the final truth, is ever regenerated anew at each turning point
of history. The fall of the leaves at autumn requires no
apology, for each successive spring testifies anew to nature's
power of resurrection.
</p>

<p>
The object of a systematic theology of Judaism, accordingly,
is to single out the essential forces of the faith. It
then will become evident how these fundamental doctrines
possess a vitality, a strength of conviction, as well as an
adaptability to varying conditions, which make them potent
factors amidst all changes of time and circumstance. According
to Rabbinical tradition, the broken tablets of the
covenant were deposited in the ark beside the new. In like
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
manner the truths held sacred by the past, but found inadequate
in their expression for a new generation, must be placed
side by side with the deeper and more clarified truths of an
advanced age, that they may appear together as the <emph>one</emph>
divine truth reflected in different rays of light.
</p>

<p>
6. Jewish theology differs radically from Christian theology
in the following three points:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> The theology of Christianity deals with articles of
faith formulated by the founders and heads of the Church
as conditions of <emph>salvation</emph>, so that any alteration in favor of
free thought threatens to undermine the very plan of salvation
upon which the Church was founded. Judaism recognizes
only such articles of faith as were adopted by the people
voluntarily as expressions of their religious consciousness,
both without external compulsion and without doing violence
to the dictates of reason. Judaism does not know salvation
by faith in the sense of Paul, the real founder of the Church,
who declared the blind acceptance of belief to be in itself
meritorious. It denies the existence of any irreconcilable
opposition between faith and reason.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>B.</hi> Christian theology rests upon a <emph>formula of
confession</emph>, the so-called Symbolum of the Apostolic Church,<note place='foot'>See
Schaff-Herzog's Encycl., art. Apostles' Creed and Symbol.</note> which
alone makes one a Christian. Judaism has no such formula
of confession which renders a Jew a Jew. No ecclesiastical
authority ever dictated or regulated the belief of the Jew;
his faith has been voiced in the solemn liturgical form of
prayer, and has ever retained its freshness and vigor of thought
in the consciousness of the people. This partly accounts for
the antipathy toward any kind of dogma or creed among
Jews.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>C.</hi> The creed is a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>conditio
sine qua non</foreign> of the Christian
Church. To disbelieve its dogmas is to cut oneself loose
from membership. Judaism is quite different. The Jew is
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
<emph>born</emph> into it and cannot extricate himself from it even by
the renunciation of his faith, which would but render him an
apostate Jew. This condition exists, because the racial community
formed, and still forms, the basis of the religious community.
It is birth, not confession, that imposes on the Jew
the obligation to work and strive for the eternal verities of
Israel, for the preservation and propagation of which he has
been chosen by the God of history.
</p>

<p>
7. The truth of the matter is that the aim and end of
Judaism is not so much the salvation of the soul in the hereafter
as the salvation of humanity in history. Its theology,
therefore, must recognize the history of human progress, with
which it is so closely interwoven. It does not, therefore,
claim to offer the final or absolute truth, as does Christian
theology, whether orthodox or liberal. It simply points out
the way leading to the highest obtainable truth. Final and
perfect truth is held forth as the ideal of all human searching
and striving, together with perfect justice, righteousness,
and peace, to be attained as the very end of history.
</p>

<p>
A systematic theology of Judaism must, accordingly, content
itself with presenting Jewish doctrine and belief in relation
to the most advanced scientific and philosophical ideas
of the age, so as to offer a comprehensive view of life and the
world (<q>Lebens- und Weltanschauung</q>); but it by no means
claims for them the character of finality. The unfolding of
Judaism's truths will be completed only when all mankind
has attained the heights of Zion's mount of vision, as beheld
by the prophets of Israel.<note place='foot'>See Schechter:
<hi rend='italic'>Studies in Judaism</hi>, Intr., XXI-XXII; p. 147, 198 f.; Foster:
<hi rend='italic'>The Finality of the Christian Religion</hi>, Chicago, 1906; Friedr.
Delitzsch: <hi rend='italic'>Zur Weiterentwicklung der Religion</hi>, 1908; and comp.
Orelli: <hi rend='italic'>Religionsgeschichte</hi>,
276 f., and Dorner: <hi rend='italic'>Beitr. z. Weitrentwicklung d. christl.
Religion</hi>, 173.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. What is Judaism?</head>

<p>
1. It is very difficult to give an exact definition of Judaism
because of its peculiarly complex character.<note place='foot'>For
the origin of the name Judaism, see Esther VIII, 17. Compare
<hi rend='italic'>Yahduth</hi>, Esther Rabbah III, 7; II
Macc. II, 21; VIII, 1, 14, 38; Graetz: <hi rend='italic'>G.
d. J.</hi>, II, 174 f.; Jost: <hi rend='italic'>G.d.
Jud.</hi>, I, 1-12; <hi rend='italic'>J. E.</hi>, art. Judaism. Regarding the
unfairness of Christian authors in their estimate of Judaism, see Schechter, l. c.,
232-251; M. Schreiner: <hi rend='italic'>D. juengst. Urtheile u.
d. Judenthum</hi>, p. 48-58. Dubnow,
Asher Ginsberg and the rest of the nationalists underrate the religious power
of the Jew's soul, which forms the essence of his character and the motive
power of all his aspirations and hopes, as well as of all his achievements in
history.</note> It combines
two widely differing elements, and when they are brought
out separately, the aspect of the whole is not taken sufficiently
into account. Religion and race form an inseparable whole
in Judaism. The Jewish people stand in the same relation to
Judaism as the <emph>body</emph> to the <emph>soul</emph>. The national or racial body
of Judaism consists of the remnant of the tribe of Judah
which succeeded in establishing a new commonwealth in
Judæa in place of the ancient Israelitish kingdom, and which
survived the downfall of state and temple to continue its
existence as a separate people during a dispersion over the
globe for thousands of years, forming ever a cosmopolitan element
among all the nations in whose lands it dwelt. Judaism,
on the other hand, is the religious system itself, the vital
element which united the Jewish people, preserving it and
regenerating it ever anew. It is the spirit which endowed
the handful of Jews with a power of resistance and a fervor
of faith unparalleled in history, enabling them to persevere
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
in the mighty contest with heathenism and Christianity. It
made of them a nation of martyrs and thinkers, suffering and
struggling for the cause of truth and justice, yet forming,
consciously or unconsciously, a potent factor in all the great
intellectual movements which are ultimately to win the entire
gentile world for the purest and loftiest truths concerning
God and man.
</p>

<p>
2. Judaism, accordingly, does not denote the Jewish
nationality, with its political and cultural achievements
and aspirations, as those who have lost faith in the religious
mission of Israel would have it. On the other hand, it is
not a nomistic or legalistic religion confined to the Jewish
people, as is maintained by Christian writers, who, lacking
a full appreciation of its lofty world-wide purpose and its
cosmopolitan and humanitarian character, claim that it has
surrendered its universal prophetic truths to Christianity.
Nor should it be presented as a religion of pure <emph>Theism</emph>,
aiming to unite all believers in one God into a Church Universal,
of which certain visionaries dream. Judaism is nothing
less than a message concerning the <emph>One and holy God</emph> and
<emph>one, undivided humanity</emph> with a world-uniting <emph>Messianic goal</emph>,
a message intrusted by divine revelation to the Jewish people.
Thus Israel is its prophetic harbinger and priestly guardian,
its witness and defender throughout the ages, who is never
to falter in the task of upholding and unfolding its truths until
they have become the possession of the whole human race.
</p>

<p>
3. Owing to this twofold nature of a universal religious
truth and at the same time a mission intrusted to a specially
selected nation or race, Judaism offers in a sense the sharpest
contrasts imaginable, which render it an enigma to the student
of religion and history, and make him often incapable of
impartial judgment. On the one hand, it shows the most
tenacious adherence to forms originally intended to preserve
the Jewish people in its priestly sanctity and separateness,
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
and thereby also to keep its religious truths pure and free
from encroachments. On the other hand, it manifests a
mighty impulse to come into close touch with the various
civilized nations, partly in order to disseminate among them
its sublime truths, appealing alike to mind and heart, partly
to clarify and deepen those truths by assimilating the wisdom
and culture of these very nations. Thus the spirit of separatism
and of universalism work in opposite directions.
Still, however hostile the two elements may appear, they
emanate from the same source. For the Jewish people,
unlike any other civilization of antiquity, entered history
with the proud claim that it possessed a truth destined to
become some day the property of mankind, and its three
thousand years of history have verified this claim.
</p>

<p>
Israel's relation to the world thus became a double one.
Its priestly world-mission gave rise to all those laws and
customs which were to separate it from its idolatrous surroundings,
and this occasioned the charge of hostility to the nations.
The accusation of Jewish misanthropy occurred as early as
the Balaam and Haman stories. As the separation continued
through the centuries, a deep-seated Jew-hatred sprang up,
first in Alexandria and Rome, then becoming a consuming
fire throughout Christendom, unquenched through the ages
and bursting forth anew, even from the midst of would-be
liberals. In contrast to this, Israel's prophetic ideal of a
humanity united in justice and peace gave to history a new
meaning and a larger outlook, kindling in the souls of all
truly great leaders and teachers, seers and sages of mankind
a love and longing for the broadening of humanity which
opened new avenues of progress and liberty. Moreover, by
its conception of man as the image of God and its teaching
of righteousness as the true path of life, Israel's Law established
a new standard of human worth and put the imprint
of Jewish idealism upon the entire Aryan civilization.
</p>

<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>

<p>
Owing to these two opposing forces, the one centripetal,
the other centrifugal, Judaism tended now inward, away from
world-culture, now outward toward the learning and the
thought of all nations; and this makes it doubly difficult
to obtain a true estimate of its character. But, after all,
these very currents and counter-currents at the different
eras of history kept Judaism in continuous tension and fluctuation,
preventing its stagnation by dogmatic formulas
and its division by ecclesiastical dissensions. <q>Both words
are the words of the living God</q> became the maxim of the
contending schools.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Erub.</hi> 13 b.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. If we now ask what period we may fix as the beginning
of Judaism, we must by no means single out the decisive
moment when Ezra the Scribe established the new commonwealth
of Judæa, based upon the Mosaic book of Law, and
excluding the Samaritans who claimed to be the heirs of
ancient Israel. This important step was but the climax,
the fruitage of that religious spirit engendered by the Judaism
of the Babylonian exile. The Captivity had become a refining
furnace for the people, making them cling with a zeal
unknown before to the teachings of the prophets, now offered
by their disciples, and to the laws, as preserved by the priestly
guilds; so the religious treasures of the few became the common
property of the many, and were soon regarded as <q>the
inheritance of the whole congregation of Jacob.</q> As a matter
of fact, Ezra represents the culmination rather than the
starting point of the great spiritual reawakening, when he
came from Babylon with a complete Code of Law, and promulgated
it in the Holy City to a worshipful congregation.<note place='foot'>Neh.
VIII, 1-18; Ez. VII, 12-28.</note>
It was Judaism, winged with a new spirit, which carried the
great unknown seer of the Exile to the very pinnacle of prophetic
vision, and made the Psalmists ring forth from the
harp of David the deepest soul-stirring notes of religious
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
devotion and aspiration that ever moved the hearts of men.
Moreover, all the great truths of prophetic revelation, of legislative
and popular wisdom, were then collected and focused,
creating a sacred literature which was to serve the whole community
as the source of instruction, consolation, and edification.
The powerful and unique institutions of the Synagogue,
intended for common instruction and devotion, are altogether
creations of the Exile, and replaced the former <emph>priestly</emph> Torah by
the Torah <emph>for the people</emph>. More wonderful still, the priestly lore
of ancient Babylon was transformed by sublime monotheistic
truths and utilized in the formation of a sacred literature; it
was placed before the history of the Hebrew patriarchs, to
form, as it were, an introduction to the Bible of humanity.
</p>

<p>
Judaism, then, far from being the late product of the Torah
and tradition, as it is often considered, was actually the
creator of the Law. Transformed and unfolded in Babylonia,
it created its own sacred literature and shaped it ever anew,
filling it always with its own spirit and with new thoughts.
It is by no means the petrifaction of the Mosaic law and the
prophetic teachings, as we are so often told, but a continuous
process of unfolding and regeneration of its great religious truth.
</p>

<p>
5. True enough, traditional or orthodox Judaism does not
share this view. The idea of gradual development is precluded
by its conception of divine revelation, by its doctrine
that both the oral and the written Torah were given at Sinai
complete and unchangeable for all time. It makes allowance
only for special institutions begun either by the prophets,
by Ezra and the Men of the Great Synagogue, his associates,
or by the masters of the Law in succeeding centuries. Nevertheless,
tradition says that the Men of the Great Synagogue
themselves collected and partly completed the sacred books,
except the five books of Moses, and that the canon was made
under the influence of the holy spirit. This holy spirit remained
in force also during the creative period of Talmudism,
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
sanctioning innovations or alterations of many kinds.<note place='foot'>See M. Bloch:
<hi rend='italic'>Tekanot</hi>, and art. Tekanot J. E. Regarding inspiration
see J. E.; Sanh, 99 a; Meg. 7 a; Maim.: <hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>, II, 45; comp.
Yerush. Ab. Zar., I, 40; Horay. III, 48 c; Levit. R. VI, 1; IX, 9; and Yoma 9 b. The
laying on of hands for ordination (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Semikah</foreign>)
implied originally the imparting
of the holy spirit, see J. E., art. Authority.</note> Modern
critical and historical research has taught us to distinguish
the products of different periods and stages of development
in both the Biblical and Rabbinical sources, and therefore
compels us to reject the idea of a uniform origin of the Law,
and also of an uninterrupted chain of tradition reaching back
to Moses on Sinai. Therefore we must attach still more
importance to the process of transformation which Judaism
had to undergo through the centuries.<note place='foot'>See Geiger, J. Z., I, p. 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
Judaism manifested its wondrous power of <emph>assimilation</emph>
by renewing itself to meet the demands of the time, first
under the influence of the ancient civilizations, Babylonia
and Persia, then of Greece and Rome, finally of the Occidental
powers, molding its religious truths and customs in ever new
forms, but all in consonance with its own genius. It adopted
the Babylonian and Persian views of the hereafter, of the upper
and the nether world with their angels and demons; so later
on it incorporated into its religious and legal system elements
of Greek and Egyptian gnosticism, Greek philosophy, and
methods of jurisprudence from Egypt, Babylon, and Rome.
In fact, the various parties which arose during the second
Temple beside each other or successively&mdash;Sadducees and
Pharisees, Essenes and Zealots&mdash;represent, on closer observation,
the different stages in the process of assimilation which
Judaism had to undergo. In like manner, the Hellenistic,
Apocryphal and Apocalyptic literature, which was rejected
and lost to sight by traditional Judaism, and which partly
fills the gap between the Bible and the Talmudic writings,
casts a flood of light upon the development of the Halakah
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
and the Haggadah. Just as the book of Ezekiel, which was
almost excluded from the Canon on account of its divergence
from the Mosaic Law, has been helpful in tracing the development
of the Priestly Code,<note place='foot'>Aboth d. R. Nathan, I; Shab.
30 b with reference to Ezek. XLIII-XLIV.</note> so the Sadduceean book of Ben
Sira<note place='foot'>See Geiger: Z. D. M. G., XII, 536; Schechter,
<hi rend='italic'>Wisdom of Ben Sira</hi>, p. 35.</note>
and the Zealotic book of Jubilees<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Jubilees,
Book of. Very instructive in this connection is
a comparative study of the Falashas, the Samaritans, especially the Dosithean
sect, and the still problematical sect discovered through the document found
by Schechter, edited by him under the title <hi rend='italic'>Fragments
of a Zadokite Sect</hi>.</note>&mdash;not to mention
the various Apocalyptic works&mdash;throw their searchlight
upon pre-Talmudic Judaism.
</p>

<p>
6. Instead of representing Judaism&mdash;as the Christian
theologians do under the guise of scientific methods&mdash;as a
nomistic religion, caring only for the external observance of
the Law, it is necessary to distinguish two opposite fundamental
tendencies; the one expressing the spirit of legalistic
nationalism, the other that of ethical or prophetic universalism.
These two work by turn, directing the general trend in the
one or the other direction according to circumstances. At
one time the center and focus of Israel's religion is the Mosaic
Law, with its sacrificial cult in charge of the priesthood of
Jerusalem's Temple; at another time it is the Synagogue,
with its congregational devotion and public instruction, its
inspiring song of the Psalmist and its prophetic consolation
and hope confined to no narrow territory, but opened wide
for a listening world. Here it is the reign of the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Halakah</foreign>
holding fast to the form of tradition, and there the free and
fanciful <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Haggadah</foreign>,
with its appeal to the sentiments and
views of the people. Here it is the spirit of <emph>ritualism</emph>, bent
on separating the Jews from the influence of foreign elements,
and there again the spirit of <emph>rationalism</emph>, eager to take part
in general culture and in the progress of the outside world.
</p>

<p>
The liberal views of Maimonides and Gersonides concerning
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
miracle and revelation, God and immortality were scarcely
shared by the majority of Jews, who, no doubt, sided rather
with the mystics, and found their mouthpiece in Abraham
ben David of Posquieres, the fierce opponent of Maimonides.
An impartial Jewish theology must therefore take cognizance
of both sides; it must include the mysticism of Isaac Luria
and Sabbathai Horwitz as well as the rationalism of Albo and
Leo da Modena. Wherever is voiced a new doctrine or a
new view of life and life's duty, which yet bears the imprint
of the Jewish consciousness, there the well-spring of divine
inspiration is seen pouring forth its living waters.
</p>

<p>
7. Even the latest interpretation of the Law, offered by
a disciple who is recognized for true conscientiousness in
religion, was revealed to Moses on Sinai, according to a
Rabbinical dictum.<note place='foot'>See Yer. Hag., I, 76, and
elsewhere.</note> Thus is exquisitely expressed the idea
of a continuous development of Israel's religious truth. As a
safeguard against arbitrary individualism, there was the principle
of loyalty and proper regard for tradition, which is aptly termed by Professor
Lazarus a <q>historical continuity.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ethics of
Judaism</hi>, I, 8-10; Geiger: J. Z., IX, 263.</note> The
Midrashic statement is quite significant that other creeds
founded on our Bible can only adhere to the letter, but the
Jewish religion possesses the key to the deeper meaning hidden
and presented in the <emph>traditional</emph> interpretation of the
Scriptures.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Pesik. R.</hi>, V, p. 146;
<hi rend='italic'>Midr. Tanhuma</hi>, ed. Buber, Wayera 6 and Ki
Thissa, 17. Comp. the legend of Moses and Akiba, Men. 29 b.</note>
That is, for Judaism Holy Scripture in its literal sense
is not the final word of God; the Bible is rather a living spring
of divine revelation, to be kept ever fresh and flowing by the
active force of the spirit. To sum up: Judaism, far from
offering a system of beliefs and ceremonies fixed for all time,
is as multifarious and manifold in its aspects as is life itself.
It comprises all phases and characteristics of both a national
and a world religion.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. The Essence of the Religion of Judaism</head>

<p>
1. We have seen how difficult it is to define Judaism clearly
and adequately, including its manifold tendencies and institutions.
Still it is necessary that we reach a full understanding
of the essence of Judaism as it manifested itself in
all periods of its history,<note place='foot'>Comp. Geiger: <hi rend='italic'>Nachgel.
Schr.</hi>, II, 37-41; also his <hi rend='italic'>Jud. u. s. Gesch.</hi>,
I, 20-35; Beck: <hi rend='italic'>D. Wesen d. Judenthums</hi>; Eschelbacher:
<hi rend='italic'>D. Judenthum u. d.
Wesen d. Christenthums</hi>; Schreiner, l. c., 26-34.</note>
and that we single out the fundamental
idea which underlies its various forms of existence
and its different movements, both intellectual and spiritual.
There can be no disputing the fact that the central idea of
Judaism and its life purpose is the doctrine of the One Only
and Holy God, whose kingdom of truth, justice and peace
is to be universally established at the end of time. This is
the main teaching of Scripture and the hope voiced in the
liturgy; while Israel's mission to defend, to unfold and to
propagate this truth is a corollary of the doctrine itself and
cannot be separated from it. Whether we regard it as Law
or a system of doctrine, as religious truth or world-mission,
this belief pledged the little tribe of Judah to a warfare of
many thousands of years against the hordes of heathendom
with all their idolatry and brutality, their deification of man
and their degradation of deity to human rank. It betokened
a battle for the pure idea of God and man, which is not to
end until the principle of divine holiness has done away with
every form of life that tends to degrade and to disunite mankind,
and until Israel's Only One has become the unifying
power and the highest ideal of all humanity.
</p>

<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>

<p>
2. Of this great world-duty of Israel only the few will
ever become fully conscious. As in the days of the prophets,
so in later periods, only a <q>small remnant</q> was fully imbued
with the lofty ideal. In times of oppression the great multitude
of the people persisted in a conscientious observance
of the Law and underwent suffering without a murmur. Yet
in times of liberty and enlightenment this same majority
often neglects to assimilate the new culture to its own superior
spirit, but instead eagerly assimilates itself to the surrounding
world, and thereby loses much of its intrinsic strength and
self-respect. The pendulum of thought and sentiment swings
to and fro between the national and the universal ideals,
while only a few maturer minds have a clear vision of the
goal as it is to be reached along both lines of development.
Nevertheless, Judaism is in a true sense a religion of the
people. It is free from all priestly tutelage and hierarchical
interference. It has no ecclesiastical system of belief, guarded
and supervised by men invested with superior powers. Its
teachers and leaders have always been men from among the
people, like the prophets of yore, with no sacerdotal privilege
or title; in fact, in his own household each father is the God-appointed
teacher of his children.<note place='foot'>Deut. VI, 7; XI, 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. Neither is Judaism the creation of a single person,
either prophet or a man with divine claims. It points back
to the patriarchs as its first source of revelation. It speaks
not of the God of Moses, of Amos and Isaiah, but of the God
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, thereby declaring the Jewish
genius to be the creator of its own religious ideas. It is therefore
incorrect to speak of a <q>Mosaic,</q> <q>Hebrew,</q> or <q>Israelitish,</q>
religion. The name <emph>Judaism</emph> alone expresses the preservation
of the religious heritage of Israel by the tribe of Judah,
with a loyalty which was first displayed by Judah himself
in the patriarchal household, and which became its characteristic
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
virtue in the history of the various tribes. Likewise
the rigid measures of Ezra in expelling all foreign
elements from the new commonwealth proved instrumental
in impressing loyalty and piety upon Jewish family life.
</p>

<p>
4. As it was bound up with the life of the Jewish people,
Judaism remained forever in close touch with the world.
Therefore it appreciated adequately the boons of life, and escaped
being reduced to the shadowy form of <q>otherworldliness.</q><note place='foot'>See
Geiger: <hi rend='italic'>Nachgel. Schr.</hi>, II, 37 f.</note>
It is a religion of <emph>life</emph>, which it wishes to sanctify
by duty rather than by laying stress on the hereafter. It
looks to the <emph>deed</emph> and the purity of the <emph>motive</emph>, not to the empty
creed and the blind belief. Nor is it a religion of <emph>redemption</emph>,
contemning this earthly life; for Judaism repudiates the
assumption of a radical power of evil in man or in the world.
Faith in the ultimate triumph of the good is essential to it.
In fact, this perfect confidence in the final victory of truth
and justice over all the powers of falsehood and wrong lent
it both its wondrous intellectual force and its high idealism,
and adorned its adherents with the martyr's crown of thorns,
such as no other human brow has ever borne.
</p>

<p>
5. <emph>Christianity</emph> and <emph>Islam</emph>, notwithstanding their alienation
from Judaism and frequent hostility, are still daughter-religions.
In so far as they have sown the seeds of Jewish truth
over all the globe and have done their share in upbuilding the
Kingdom of God on earth, they must be recognized as divinely
appointed emissaries and agencies. Still Judaism sets forth
its doctrine of God's unity and of life's holiness in a far superior
form than does Christianity. It neither permits the deity
to be degraded into the sphere of the sensual and human,
nor does it base its morality upon a love bereft of the vital
principle of justice. Against the rigid monotheism of Islam,
which demands blind submission to the stern decrees of
inexorable fate, Judaism on the other hand urges its belief
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
in God's paternal love and mercy, which educates all the children
of men, through trial and suffering, for their high destiny.
</p>

<p>
6. Judaism denies most emphatically the right of Christianity
or any other religion to arrogate to itself the title of
<q>the absolute religion</q> or to claim to be <q>the finest blossom
and the ripest fruit of religious development.</q> As if any
mortal man at any time or under any condition could say without
presumption: <q>I am the Truth</q> or <q>No one cometh unto
the Father but by me.</q><note place='foot'>John XIV, 6. Comp. Dorner, l. c., 173;
and his <hi rend='italic'>Grundprobleme d. Religionsphilosophie</hi>;
Orelli: <hi rend='italic'>Religionsgeschichte</hi>, 276 f.</note>
<q>When man was to proceed from
the hands of his Maker,</q> says the Midrash, <q>the Holy One,
Blessed be His name, cast truth down to the earth, saying,
<q>Let truth spring forth from the earth, and righteousness
look down from heaven.</q></q><note place='foot'>Gen. R. VIII,
5.</note> The full unfolding of the religious
and moral life of mankind is the work of countless generations
yet to come, and many divine heralds of truth and
righteousness have yet to contribute their share. In this
work of untold ages, Judaism claims that it has achieved
and is still achieving its full part as the prophetic world-religion.
Its law of righteousness, which takes for its scope
the whole of human life, in its political and social relations
as well as its personal aspects, forms the foundation of its
ethics for all time; while its hope for a future realization of
the Kingdom of God has actually become the aim of human
history. As a matter of fact, when the true object of religion
is the hallowing of life rather than the salvation of the soul,
there is little room left for sectarian exclusiveness, or for a
heaven for believers and a hell for unbelievers. With this
broad outlook upon life, Judaism lays claim, not to perfection,
but to perfectibility; it has supreme capacity for growing
toward the highest ideals of mankind, as beheld by the
prophets in their Messianic visions.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_IV'/>
<head>Chapter IV. The Jewish Articles of Faith</head>

<p>
1. In order to reach a clear opinion, whether or not Judaism
has articles of faith in the sense of Church dogmas, a question
so much discussed since the days of Moses Mendelssohn, it
seems necessary first to ascertain what faith in general means
to the Jew.<note place='foot'>See Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Studies</hi>,
147-181 and notes 351 f.; Mendelssohn: <hi rend='italic'>Ges. Schr.</hi>,
III, 321. Comp. Schlesinger: <hi rend='italic'>Buch Ikkarim</hi>,
630-632; Bousset: <hi rend='italic'>Religion d. Judenthums</hi>,
170 f., 175, and thereto Perles: <hi rend='italic'>Bousset</hi>, 112 f.; Martin Schreiner:
l. c., 35 f.; J. E., art. Faith and Articles of Faith (E. G. Hirsch); Felsenthal,
Margolis, and Kohler, in Y. B. C. C. A. R., 1897, p. 54; 1903, p. 188-193;
1905, p. 83; Neumark: art. Ikkarim in <hi rend='italic'>Ozar ha Yahduth</hi>; D. Fr.
Strauss: <hi rend='italic'>D. christl. Glaubenslehre</hi>, I, 25.</note>
Now the word used in Jewish literature for
faith is <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Emunah</foreign>,
from the root <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Aman</foreign>, to be firm; this denotes
firm reliance upon God, and likewise firm adherence to him,
hence both <emph>faith</emph> and <emph>faithfulness</emph>. Both Scripture and the
Rabbis demanded confiding trust in God, His messengers, and
His words, not the formal acceptance of a prescribed belief.<note place='foot'>See
Gen. XV, 6; Mek. to Ex. XIV; J. E., art. Faith.</note>
Only when contact with the non-Jewish world emphasized
the need for a clear expression of the belief in the unity of
God, such as was found in the Shema,<note place='foot'>Deut.
VI, 1-6; XI, 13-21; Num. XV, 37-41.</note> and when the proselyte
was expected to declare in some definite form the fundamentals
of the faith he espoused, was the importance of a concrete
<emph>confession</emph> felt.<note place='foot'>See Bousset,
II, 224 f. The term <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Pistis</foreign>
= faith, assumes a new meaning
in Hellenistic Literature.</note> Accordingly we find the beginnings of a
formulated belief in the synagogal liturgy, in the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Emeth we
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
Yatzib</foreign><note place='foot'>See J. E., art.
Emeth we Yatzib.</note> and the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Alenu</foreign>,<note place='foot'>See J. E., art.
Alenu.</note> while in the Haggadah Abraham
is represented both as the exemplar of a hero of faith and as
the type of a missionary, wandering about to lead the heathen
world towards the pure monotheistic faith.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art.
Abraham in Apocryphical and Rabbinical Lit.</note> While the
Jewish concept of faith underwent a certain transformation,
influenced by other systems of belief, and the formulation of
Jewish doctrines appeared necessary, particularly in opposition
to the Christian and Mohammedan creeds, still belief
never became the essential part of religion, conditioning salvation,
as in the Church founded by Paul. For, as pointed
out above, Judaism lays all stress upon conduct, not confession;
upon a hallowed life, not a hollow creed.
</p>

<p>
2. There is no Biblical nor Rabbinical precept, <q>Thou
shalt believe!</q> Jewish thinkers felt all the more the need
to point out as fundamentals or roots of Judaism those doctrines
upon which it rests, and from which it derives its vital
force. To the rabbis, the <q>root</q> of faith is the recognition of a divine Judge to
whom we owe account for all our doings.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sifra</hi>
Behukothai, III, 6; <hi rend='italic'>Sanh.</hi> 38 b; <hi rend='italic'>Targ. Y.</hi>
to Gen. IV, 8.</note>
The recital of the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shema</foreign>,
which is called in the Mishnah
<q>accepting the yoke of God's sovereignty,</q> and which is
followed by the solemn affirmation, <q>True and firm belief
is this for us</q><note place='foot'>Ber. II, 2; see Kohler:
<hi rend='italic'>Monatsschrift</hi>, 1883, p. 445.</note>
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Emeth we Yatzib</foreign>
or <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Emeth we Emunah</foreign>), is,
in fact, the earliest form of the confession of faith.<note place='foot'>Kohler,
l. c.</note> In the course of time this confession of belief in the unity of God
was no longer deemed sufficient to serve as basis for the whole
structure of Judaism; so the various schools and authorities
endeavored to work out in detail a series of fundamental
doctrines.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Chapter_IV_Section_3'/>
3. The Mishnah, in Sanhedrin, X, 1, which seems to date
back to the beginnings of Pharisaism, declares the following
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
three to have no share in the world to come: he who denies
the resurrection of the dead; he who says that the Torah&mdash;both
the written and the oral Law&mdash;is not divinely revealed;
and the Epicurean, who does not believe in the moral government
of the world.<note place='foot'>The Mishnaic
<foreign rend='italic'>Apicoros</foreign> corresponded to the Greek,
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Epicoureios</foreign>, and was
no longer understood by the Talmudists; see Schechter:
<hi rend='italic'>Studies in Judaism</hi>, I,
157. It is defined by Josephus: <hi rend='italic'>Antiquities</hi>,
X, 11, 7: <q>The Epicureans ...
are in a state of error, who cast Providence out of life, and do not believe that
God takes care of the affairs of the world, nor that the universe is governed by
a Being which outlives all things in everlasting self-sufficiency and bliss, but declare
it to be self-sustaining and void of a ruler and protector ... like a ship
without a helmsman and like a chariot without a driver.</q> Comp. also Oppenheim
in <hi rend='italic'>Monatsschr.</hi>, 1864, p. 149.</note>
We find here (in reverse order, owing
to historical conditions), the beliefs in Revelation, Retribution,
and the Hereafter singled out as the three fundamentals
of Rabbinical Judaism. Rabbi Hananel, the great North
African Talmudist, about the middle of the tenth century,
seems to have been under the influence of Mohammedan and
Karaite doctrines, when he speaks of four fundamentals of
the faith: God, the prophets, the future reward and punishment,
and the Messiah.<note place='foot'>See Rappaport; <q>Biography of
R. Hananel,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Bikkure ha Ittim</hi>,
1842.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. The doctrine of the One and Only God stands, as a
matter of course, in the foreground. Philo of Alexandria,
at the end of his treatise on Creation, singles out five principles
which are bound up with it, viz.: 1, God's existence
and His government of the world; 2, His unity; 3, the world
as His creation; 4, the harmonious plan by which it was
established; and 5, His Providence. Josephus, too, in his
apology for Judaism written against Apion,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra
Apionem</hi>, II, 22. See J. G. Mueller: <hi rend='italic'>Josephus' Schrift
gegen Apion</hi>, 311-313.</note> emphasizes the
belief in God's all-encompassing Providence, His incorporeality,
and His self-sufficiency as the Creator of the universe.
</p>

<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>

<p>
The example of Islam, which had very early formulated a
confession of faith of speculative character for daily recitation,<note place='foot'>See
Alfred v. Kremer: <hi rend='italic'>Gesch. d. herrsch. Ideen d. Islam</hi>, 39-41;
Goldziher, D. M. L. Z., XLIV, p. 168 f.; XLI, p. 72 f., which passages cast much light
upon the Jewish <foreign rend='italic'>Ani Maamin</foreign>.</note>
influenced first Karaite and then Rabbanite teachers to elaborate
the Jewish doctrine of One Only God into a philosophic
creed. The Karaites modeled their creed after the Mohammedan
pattern, which gave them ten articles of faith; of these
the first three dwelt on: 1, creation out of nothing; 2, the
existence of God, the Creator; 3, the unity and incorporeality
of God.<note place='foot'>See Jost: <hi rend='italic'>Gesch. d. Jud.</hi>, II,
330 f.; Frankl: art. Karaites in <hi rend='italic'>Ersch und Gruber's
Encyclopaedie</hi>; Loew: <hi rend='italic'>Juedische Dogmen</hi>, Ges. s.
I, 154; Schechter, l. c.</note>
</p>

<p>
Abraham ben David (<hi rend='italic'>Ibn Daud</hi>) of Toledo sets forth in
his <q>Sublime Faith</q> six essentials of the Jewish faith: 1, the
existence; 2, the unity; 3, the incorporeality; 4, the omnipotence
of God (to this he subjoins the existence of angelic
beings); 5, revelation and the immutability of the Law;
and 6, divine Providence.<note place='foot'>J. Guttman: <hi rend='italic'>D.
Religionsphil, v. Abraham Ibn Daud</hi>; David Kaufmann,
<hi rend='italic'>Gesch. d. Attributenlehre</hi>; Neumark: <hi rend='italic'>Gesch.
d. juedisch. Phil.</hi> vols. I and II.</note> Maimonides, the greatest of all
medieval thinkers, propounded thirteen articles of faith,
which took the place of a creed in the Synagogue for the following
centuries, as they were incorporated in the liturgy
both in the form of a credo (<foreign rend='italic'>Ani Maamin</foreign>) and in a poetic
version. His first five articles were: 1, the existence; 2, the
unity; 3, the incorporeality; 4, the eternity of God; and
5, that He alone should be the object of worship; to which
we must add his 10th, divine Providence.<note place='foot'>Maimonides: Commentary
on Mishnah, Sanh., X, 1; Schechter, l. c.,
163; Holzer: <hi rend='italic'>Gesch. d. Dogmenlehre</hi>, Berlin,
1901.</note> Others, not
satisfied with the purely metaphysical form of the Maimonidean
creed, accentuated the doctrines of creation out of nothing
and special Providence.<note place='foot'>See Loew, l. c., 156;
Schechter, l. c, 165.</note>
</p>

<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>

<p>
This speculative form of faith, however, has been most
severely denounced by Samuel David Luzzatto (1800-1865) as
<q>Atticism</q>;<note place='foot'>See P. Bloch: <q>Luzzatto als
Religionsphilosoph</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Samuel David Luzzatto</hi>,
p. 49-71. Comp. Hochmuth: <hi rend='italic'>Gotteskenntniss und Gottesverehrung</hi>,
Einleitung.</note> that is, the Hellenistic or philosophic tendency
to consider religion as a purely intellectual system, instead of
the great dynamic force for man's moral and spiritual elevation.
He holds that Judaism, as the faith transmitted to us
from Abraham, our ancestor, must be considered, not as a
mere speculative mode of reasoning, but as a moral life force,
manifested in the practice of righteousness and brotherly
love. Indeed, this view is supported by modern Biblical research,
which brings out as the salient point in Biblical teaching
the ethical character of the God taught by the prophets,
and shows that the essential truth of revelation is not to be
found in a metaphysical but in an ethical monotheism. At
the same time, the fact must not be overlooked that the
Jewish doctrine of God's unity was strengthened in the contest
with the dualistic and trinitarian beliefs of other religions,
and that this unity gave Jewish thought both lucidity and
sublimity, so that it has surpassed other faiths in intellectual
power and in passion for truth. The Jewish conception of
God thus makes <emph>truth</emph>, as well as
<emph>righteousness</emph> and <emph>love</emph>, both
a moral duty for man and a historical task comprising all
humanity.
</p>

<p>
5. The second fundamental article of the Jewish faith is
divine revelation, or, as the Mishnah expresses it, the belief
that the Torah emanates from God
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>min ha shamayim</foreign>). In
the Maimonidean thirteen articles, this is divided into four:
his 6th, belief in the prophets; 7, in the prophecy of Moses
as the greatest of all; 8, in the divine origin of the Torah,
both the written and the oral Law; and 9, its immutability.
The fundamental character of these, however, was contested
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
by Hisdai Crescas and his disciples, Simon Duran and Joseph
Albo.<note place='foot'>See Schechter, l. c., 167 and the
notes.</note> As a matter of fact, they are based not so much upon
Rabbinical teaching as upon the prevailing views of Mohammedan
theology,<note place='foot'>See Horowitz: <hi rend='italic'>D. Psychologie
u. d. jued. Religionsphilosophie</hi>, 1883.</note> and were undoubtedly dictated by the
desire to dispute the claims of Christianity and Islam that
they represented a higher revelation. Our modern historical
view, however, includes all human thought and belief; it
therefore rejects altogether the assumption of a supernatural
origin of either the written or the oral Torah, and insists that
the subject of prophecy, revelation, and inspiration in general
be studied in the light of psychology and ethnology, of general
history and comparative religion.
</p>

<p>
6. The third fundamental article of the Jewish faith is
the belief in a moral government of the world, which manifests
itself in the reward of good and the punishment of evil,
either here or hereafter. Maimonides divides this into two
articles, which really belong together, his 10th, God's knowledge
of all human acts and motives, and 11, reward and
punishment. The latter includes the hereafter and the
last Day of Judgment, which, of course, applies to all human
beings.
</p>

<p>
7. Closely connected with retribution is the belief in the
resurrection of the dead, which is last among the thirteen
articles. This belief, which originally among the Pharisees
had a national and political character, and was therefore
connected especially with the Holy Land (as will be seen in
Chapter <ref target='Chapter_LIV'>LIV</ref> below), received in the Rabbinical schools
more and more a universal form. Maimonides went so far as to
follow the Platonic view rather than that of the Bible or the
Talmud, and thus transformed it into a belief in the continuity
of the soul after death. In this form, however, it is
actually a postulate, or corollary, of the belief in retribution.
</p>

<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>

<p>
8. The old hope for the national resurrection of Israel took
in the Maimonidean system the form of a belief in the coming
of the Messiah (article 12), to which, in the commentary on
the Mishnah, he gives the character of a belief in the restoration
of the Davidic dynasty. Joseph Albo, with others,
disputes strongly the fundamental character of this belief;
he shows the untenability of Maimonides' position by referring
to many Talmudic passages, and at the same time he casts
polemical side glances upon the Christian Church, which is really
founded on Messianism in the special form of its Christology.<note place='foot'>See
J. E., art. Albo by E. G. Hirsch, and the bibliography there.</note>
Jehuda ha Levi, in his <hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>, substitutes for this as
a fundamental doctrine the belief in the election of Israel
for its world-mission.<note place='foot'>See Schechter, l. c., p.
162.</note> It certainly redounds to the credit of
the leaders of the modern Reform movement that they took
the election of Israel rather than the Messiah as their cardinal
doctrine, again bringing it home to the religious consciousness
of the Jew, and placing it at the very center of their system.
In this way they reclaimed for the Messianic hope the universal
character which was originally given it by the great
seer of the Exile.<note place='foot'>Isa. XLIX, 9, and elsewhere.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. The thirteen articles of Maimonides, in setting forth
a Jewish <hi rend='italic'>Credo</hi>, formed a vigorous opposition to the Christian
and Mohammedan creeds; they therefore met almost universal
acceptance among the Jewish people, and were given
a place in the common prayerbook, in spite of their deficiencies,
as shown by Crescas and his school. Nevertheless,
we must admit that Crescas shows the deeper insight into
the nature of religion when he observes that the main fallacy
of the Maimonidean system lies in founding the Jewish faith
on <emph>speculative knowledge</emph>, which is a matter of the intellect,
rather than <emph>love</emph> which flows from the heart, and which alone
leads to piety and goodness. True love, he says, requires
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
the belief neither in retribution nor in immortality. Moreover,
in striking contrast to the insistence of Maimonides or
the immutability of the Mosaic Law, Crescas maintains the
possibility of its continuous progress in accordance with the
intellectual and spiritual needs of the time, or, what amounts
to the same thing, the continuous perfectibility of the revealed
Law itself.<note place='foot'>See Schechter, l. c., p.
169.</note> Thus the criticism of Crescas leads at
once to a radically different theology than that of Maimonides,
and one which appeals far more to our own religious thought.
</p>

<p>
10. Another doctrine of Judaism, which was greatly underrated
by medieval scholars, and which has been emphasized
in modern times only in contrast to the Christian theory of
original sin, is that man was created in the image of God.
Judaism holds that the soul of man came forth pure from the
hand of its Maker, endowed with freedom, unsullied by any
inherent evil or inherited sin. Thus man is, through the exercise
of his own free will, capable of attaining to an ever higher degree
his mental, moral, and spiritual powers in the course of history.
This is the Biblical idea of God's spirit as immanent in man;
all prophetic truth is based upon it; and though it was often
obscured, this theory was voiced by many of the masters of
Rabbinical lore, such as R. Akiba and others.<note place='foot'>Aboth,
III, 1; Gen. R. XXI, 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
11. Every attempt to formulate the doctrines or articles
of faith of Judaism was made, in order to guard the Jewish
faith from the intrusion of foreign beliefs, never to impose
disputed beliefs upon the Jewish community itself. Many,
indeed, challenged the fundamental character of the thirteen
articles of Maimonides. Albo reduced them to three, viz.:
the belief in God, in revelation, and retribution; others, with
more arbitrariness than judgement, singled out three, five, six,
or even more as principal doctrines;<note place='foot'>See Schechter, l.
c.</note> while rigid conservatives,
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
such as Isaac Abravanel and David ben Zimra, altogether
disapproved the attempt to formulate articles of faith. The
former maintained that every word in the Torah is, in fact,
a principle of faith, and the latter<note place='foot'>See Loew, l. c., 157,
and his <q><hi rend='italic'>Mafteah</hi>,</q> p. 331; Schechter, l.
c.</note> pointed in the same way
to the 613 commandments of the Torah, spoken of by R.
Simlai the Haggadist in the third century.<note place='foot'>Makk. 23 b.</note>
</p>

<p>
The present age of historical research imposes the same
necessity of restatement or reformulation upon us. We
must do as Maimonides did,&mdash;as Jews have always done,&mdash;point
out anew the really fundamental doctrines, and discard
those which have lost their holdup on the modern Jew, or which
conflict directly with his religious consciousness. If Judaism
is to retain its prominent position among the powers of thought,
and to be clearly understood by the modern world, it must
again reshape its religious truths in harmony with the dominant
ideas of the age.
</p>

<p>
Many attempts of this character have been made by modern
rabbis and teachers, most of them founded upon Albo's three
articles. Those who penetrated somewhat more deeply into
the essence of Judaism added a fourth article, the belief in
Israel's priestly mission, and at the same time, instead of the
belief in retribution, included the doctrine of man's kinship with God, or, if one
may coin the word, his <hi rend='italic'>God-childship</hi>.<note place='foot'>See
J. E., art. Catechism by E. Schreiber.</note>
Few, however, have succeeded in working out the entire content
of the Jewish faith from a modern viewpoint, which
must include historical, critical, and psychological research,
as well as the study of comparative religion.
</p>

<p>
12. The following tripartite plan is that of the present
attempt to present the doctrines of Judaism systematically
along the lines of historical development:
</p>

<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>

<p>
I. <hi rend='smallcaps'>God</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> Man's consciousness of God, and divine revelation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>b.</hi> God's spirituality, His unity, His holiness, His perfection.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>c.</hi> His relation to the world: Creation and Providence.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi> His relation to man: His justice, His love and mercy.
</p>

<p>
II. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Man</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> Man's God-childship; his moral freedom and yearning for God.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>b.</hi> Sin and repentance; prayer and worship; immortality, reward and
punishment.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>c.</hi> Man and humanity: the moral factors in history.
</p>

<p>
III. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Israel and the Kingdom of God</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>a.</hi> The priest-mission of Israel, its destiny as teacher and
martyr among the nations, and its Messianic hope.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>b.</hi> The Kingdom of God: the nations and religions of the world in a
divine plan of universal salvation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>c.</hi> The Synagogue and its institutions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi> The ethics of Judaism and the Kingdom of God.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part I. God</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A. God As He Makes Himself Known To Man</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. Man's Consciousness of God and Belief in God</head>

<p>
1. Holy Writ employs two terms for religion, both of
which lay stress upon its moral and spiritual nature:
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Yirath Elohim</foreign>&mdash;<q>fear of
God</q>&mdash;and
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Daath Elohim</foreign>&mdash;<q>knowledge
or consciousness of God.</q> Whatever the fear of God may
have meant in the lower stages of primitive religion, in the
Biblical and Rabbinical conceptions it exercises a wholesome
moral effect; it stirs up the conscience and keeps man from
wrongdoing. Where fear of God is lacking, violence and
vice are rife;<note place='foot'>Gen. XX, 11.</note>
it keeps society in order and prompts the
individual to walk in the path of duty. Hence it is called
<q>the beginning of wisdom.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. CXI, 10;
Prov. IX, 10; Job XXVIII, 28.</note> The divine revelation of Sinai
accentuates as its main purpose <q>to put the fear of God into
the hearts of the people, lest they sin.</q><note place='foot'>Ex. XX, 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. God-consciousness, or <q>knowledge of God,</q> signifies an
inner experience which impels man to practice the right and to
shun evil, the recognition of God as the moral power of life.
<q>Because there is no knowledge of God,</q> therefore do the
people heap iniquity upon iniquity, says Hosea, and he hopes
to see the broken covenant with the Lord renewed through
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
faithfulness grounded on the consciousness of God.<note place='foot'>Hos.
IV, 1, 6; II. 3; XIII, 4-5.</note> Jeremiah
also insists upon <q>the knowledge of God</q> as a moral force,
and, like Hosea, he anticipates the renewal of the broken covenant
when <q>the Lord shall write His law upon the heart</q>
of the people, and <q>they shall all know Him from the least
of them unto the greatest of them.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. IX, 23; XXII, 16;
XXXI, 32-33.</note> Wherever Scripture
speaks of <q>knowledge of God,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. IV, 39; VII,
9.</note> it always means the moral
and spiritual recognition of the Deity as life's inmost power,
determining human conduct, and by no means refers to mere
intellectual perception of the truth of Jewish monotheism,
which is to refute the diverse forms of polytheism. This
misconception of the term <q>knowledge of God,</q> as used in the
Bible, led the leading medieval thinkers of Judaism, especially
the school of Maimonides, and even down to Mendelssohn,
into the error of confusing religion and philosophy, as if both
resulted from pure reason. It is man's moral nature rather
than his intellectual capacity, that leads him <q>to know God
and walk in His ways.</q><note place='foot'>Knowledge as intellect is brought out as
early as the Book of Wisdom, XIII, 1; see especially Maimonides:
<hi rend='italic'>Yesode ha Torah</hi>, I, 1-3; <hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>, I, 39; III,
28. In opposition, see Rosin: <hi rend='italic'>Ethik des Maimonides</hi>, 101;
Luzzatto and Hochmuth, l. c.; also Dillmann: H. B. d. alttestamentl. Theol., 204 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. It is mainly through the <emph>conscience</emph> that man becomes
conscious of God. He sees himself, a moral being, guided by
motives which lend a purpose to his acts and his omissions,
and thus feels that this purpose of his must somehow be in
accord with a higher purpose, that of a Power who directs and
controls the whole of life. The more he sees purpose ruling
individuals and nations, the more will his God-consciousness
grow into the conviction that there is but One and Only God,
who in awful grandeur holds dominion over the world. This
is the developmental process of religious truth, as it is unfolded
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
by the prophets and as it underlies the historic framework
of the Bible. In this light Jewish monotheism appears
as the ripe fruitage of religion in its universal as well as its
primitive form of God-consciousness, as the highest attainment
of man in his eternal seeking after God. Polytheism,
on the other hand, with its idolatrous and immoral practices,
appeared to the prophets and lawgivers of Israel to be, not a
competing religion, but simply a falling away from God. They
felt it to be a loss or eclipse of the genuine God-consciousness.
The object of revelation, therefore, is to lead back all mankind
to the God whom it had deserted, and to restore to all men their
primal consciousness of God, with its power of moral regeneration.
</p>

<p>
4. In the same degree as this God-consciousness grows
stronger, it crystallizes into <emph>belief</emph> in God, and culminates in
<emph>love</emph> of God. As stated above,<note place='foot'>Ch.
<ref target='Chapter_IV'>IV</ref>.</note>
in Judaism belief&mdash;<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Emunah</foreign>&mdash;never
denotes the acceptance of a creed. It is rather the
confiding trust by which the frail mortal finds a <emph>firm</emph> hold on
God amidst the uncertainties and anxieties of life, the search
for His shelter in distress, the reliance on His ever-ready help
when one's own powers fail. The believer is like a little child
who follows confidingly the guidance of his father, and feels
safe when near his arm. In fact, the double meaning of
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Emunah</foreign>,
faith and faithfulness, suggests man's child-like
faith in the paternal faithfulness of God. The patriarch
Abraham is presented in both Biblical and Rabbinical writings
as the pattern of such a faith,<note place='foot'>Gen. XV, 6;
see J. E., art. Abraham.</note> and the Jewish people likewise are characterized
in the Talmud as <q>believers, sons of believers.</q><note place='foot'>Shab. 97 a.</note>
The Midrash extols such life-cheering faith as
the power which inspires true heroism and deeds of valor.<note place='foot'>Mek.
Beshallak 6, p. 41 ab.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. The highest triumph of God-consciousness, however, is
attained in <emph>love</emph> of God such as can renounce cheerfully all
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
the boons of life and undergo the bitterest woe without a
murmur. The book of Deuteronomy inculcates love of God
as the beginning and the end of the Law,<note place='foot'>Deut.
VI, 5; X, 12; XI, 1; XIII, 22; XXX, 6, 16, 20.</note> and the rabbis
declare it to be the highest type of human perfection. In
commenting upon the verse, <q>Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
might,</q> they say: <q>Love the Law, even when thy life is
demanded as its price, nay, even with the last breath of thy
body, with a heart that has no room for dissent, amid every
visitation of destiny!</q><note place='foot'>Sifre to Deut. VI,
5.</note> They point to the tragic martyrdom
of R. Akiba as an example of such a love sealed by death. In like manner
they refer the expression, <q>they that love Thee,</q><note place='foot'>Judges
V, 31.</note> to those who bear insults without resentment; who hear
themselves abused without retort; who do good unselfishly,
without caring for recognition; and who cheerfully suffer as
a test of their fortitude and their love of God.<note place='foot'>Shab.
88 b.</note> Thus throughout
all Rabbinical literature love of God is regarded as the
highest principle of religion and as the ideal of human perfection,
which was exemplified by Job, according to the oldest
Haggadah, and, according to the Mishnah, by Abraham.<note place='foot'>See
Testament of Job, and notes by Kohler, in <hi rend='italic'>Semitic Studies in Memory
of Alexander Kohut</hi>, 271, and Sota, V, 5.</note>
Another interpretation of the verse cited from Deuteronomy
reads, <q>Love God in such a manner that thy fellow-creatures
may love Him owing to thy deeds.</q><note place='foot'>Sifre, l. c.</note>
</p>

<p>
All these passages and many others<note place='foot'>See Yoma, 86 a; T.
d. El. R., XXIV; Maimonides, <hi rend='italic'>H. Teshubah</hi>, X;
Crescas: <hi rend='italic'>Or Adonai</hi>, I, 3. Comp.
<hi rend='italic'>Testaments Twelve Patriarchs</hi>, Simeon 3,
4; Issachar, 5; Philo: Quod omnis probus liber, 12 and elsewhere.</note>
show what a prominent
place the principle of love occupied in Judaism. This
is, indeed, best voiced in the Song of Songs:<note place='foot'>Song of Songs
VII, 6, 7.</note> <q>For love is
strong as death; the flashes thereof are flashes of fire, a very
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
flame of the Lord. Many waters cannot quench that love,
neither can the floods drown it.</q> It set the heart of the Jew
aglow during all the centuries, prompting him to sacrifice his
life and all that was dear to him for the glorification of his
God, to undergo for his faith a martyrdom without parallel
in history.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Revelation, Prophecy, and Inspiration</head>

<p>
1. Divine revelation signifies two different things: first,
God's self-revelation, which the Rabbis called
<foreign rend='italic'>Gilluy Shekinah</foreign>,
<q>the manifestation of the divine Presence,</q> and, second, the
revelation of His will, for which they used the term
<foreign rend='italic'>Torah
min ha Shamayim</foreign>, <q>the Law as emanating from God.</q><note place='foot'>See
Sifre Deut. XXVI, 8; Sanh. X, 1; J. E., art. Revelation; Dillmann,
61 f.; Geiger, D. Jud. u. s. Gesch. I, 34 f.</note>
The former appealed to the child-like belief of the Biblical
age, which took no offense at anthropomorphic ideas, such
as the descent of God from heaven to earth, His appearing to
men in some visible form, or any other miracle; the latter
appears to be more acceptable to those of more advanced
religious views. Both conceptions, however, imply that the
religious truth of revelation was communicated to man by a
special act of God.
</p>

<p>
2. Each creative act is a mystery beyond the reach of
human observation. In all fields of endeavor the flashing
forth of genius impresses us as the work of a mysterious force,
which acts upon an elect individual or nation and brings it
into close touch with the divine. In the religious genius
especially is this true; for in him all the spiritual forces of
the age seem to be energized and set into motion, then to burst
forth into a new religious consciousness, which is to revolutionize
religious thought and feeling. In a child-like age
when the emotional life and the imagination predominate,
and man's mind, still receptive, is overwhelmed by mighty
visions, the Deity stirs the soul in some form perceptible to
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
the senses. Thus the <q>seer</q> assumes a trance-like state
where the Ego, the self-conscious personality, is pushed into
the background; he becomes a passive instrument, the mouthpiece
of the Deity; from Him he receives a message to the
people, and in his vision he beholds God who sends him. This
appearance of God upon the background of the soul, which
reflects Him like a mirror, is Revelation.<note place='foot'>See Deut. XIII, 2-6,
where prophet forms a parallel to dreamer of dreams.
God appears in a dream to Abraham (Gen. XV, 1, 12), to Abimelek (Gen. XX,
3, 6), to Jacob (XXVIII, 12; XXXI, 11; XLVI, 2), to Laban (XXXI, 24),
to Balaam (Num. XXIV, 3), and to Eliphaz (Job IV, 3-6). Dream-like visions
open the prophetic career of Moses (Exod. III, 3-6), Samuel (I Sam. III, 1,
15, 21), Isaiah (Is. VI, 1 f.), Jeremiah (Jer. I, 11 f.), Ezekiel (Ezek. I, 4), and
others. Revelation in the Bible is <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Mahazeh</foreign>,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hazon</foreign>, and
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hizayon</foreign>, <q>vision</q>&mdash;whence
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hozeh</foreign>, <q>seer</q>; or
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>mareh</foreign>, <q>sight,</q>
whence <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>roeh</foreign>, <q>seer.</q> See also
Geiger: <hi rend='italic'>Urschrift</hi>, 340; 390. Prophecy without dream or vision is
claimed for Moses (Num. XII, 6-8; Exod. XXX, 11; Deut. XXXIV, 10; see Maimonides:
<hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>, II, 43-47; Albo, <hi rend='italic'>Ikkarim</hi>, III, 8).
The revelation on Sinai is described as <q>the great vision,</q> or
<hi rend='italic'>mareh:</hi> Exod. III, 3; XXIV, 17; compare
Deut. IV, 11-V, 23, according to which only a <q>voice</q> is heard. Instead
of God the later prophets see an angel, as Zach. I, 8, 11; II, 2 f. Compare
Yebam. 49 b, as to the difference between Isaiah, who saw God in a vision, and
Moses, who saw Him <q>in a shining mirror.</q> He will appear in the latter way
to the righteous in the future world, Suc. 45 b; Lev. R. I, 14; I Cor. XIII, 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. The states of the soul when men see such visions of the
Deity predominate in the beginnings of all religions. Accordingly,
Scripture ascribes such revelations to non-Israelites as
well as to the patriarchs and prophets of Israel,&mdash;to Abimelek
and Laban, Balaam, Job, and Eliphaz.<note place='foot'>See Gen. XX, 6;
XXXI, 29; Num. XXIV; Job IV, 16 f.; XXXVIII, 1.</note> Therefore the
Jewish prophet is not distinguished from the rest by the
capability to receive divine revelation, but rather by the
intrinsic nature of the revelation which he receives. His
vision comes from a moral God. The Jewish genius perceived
God as the moral power of life, whether in the form expressed
by Abraham, Moses, Elijah, or by the literary prophets,
and all of these, coming into touch with Him, were lifted into
a higher sphere, where they received a new truth, hitherto
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
hidden from man. In speaking through them, God appeared
actually to have stepped into the sphere of human life
as its moral Ruler. This self-revelation of God as the Ruler
of man in righteousness, which must be viewed in the life of
any prophet as a providential act, forms the great historical
sequence in the history of Israel, upon which rests the Jewish
religion.<note place='foot'>The Hebrew word for prophecy is
passive,&mdash;<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>nibba'</foreign> or
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hithnabbe'</foreign>, <q>to be
made to speak,</q> or <q>to bubble forth,</q>&mdash;the Deity being the active power,
while the prophet is His mouthpiece.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. The divine revelation in Israel was by no means a
single act, but a process of development, and its various
stages correspond to the degrees of culture of the people.
For this reason the great prophets also depended largely
upon dreams and visions, at least in their consecration to the
prophetic mission, when one solemn act was necessary.
After that the message itself and its new moral content set
the soul of the prophet astir. Not the vision or its imagery,
but the new truth itself seizes him with irresistible force, so
that he is carried away by the divine power and speaks as
the mouthpiece of God, using lofty poetic diction while in
a state of ecstacy. Hence he speaks of God in the <emph>first</emph> person.
The highest stage of all is that where the prophet receives the
divine truth in the form of pure thought and with complete
self-consciousness. Therefore the Scripture says of Moses
and of no other, <q>The Lord spoke to Moses face to face, as
a man speaks to another.</q><note place='foot'>Ex. XXXIII, 11; Deut. XXXIV, 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. The story of the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai is
in reality the revelation of God to the people of Israel as part
of the great world-drama of history. Accordingly, the chief
emphasis is laid upon the miraculous element, the descent
of the Lord to the mountain in fire and storm, amid thunder
and lightning, while the Ten Words themselves were proclaimed
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
by Moses as God's herald.<note place='foot'>Ex. XIX, 19; XX,
19.</note> As a matter of fact, the
first words of the narrative state its purpose, the consecration
of the Jewish people at the outset of their history to be a nation
of prophets and priests.<note place='foot'>Ex. XIX, 1-8.</note>
Therefore the rabbis lay stress
upon the acceptance of the Law by the people in saying:
<q>All that the Lord sayeth we shall do and hearken.</q><note place='foot'>Shab.
88 a after Ex. XXIV, 7.</note> From
a larger point of view, we see here the dramatized form of the
truth of Israel's <emph>election</emph> by divine Providence for its historic
religious mission.
</p>

<p>
6. The rabbis ascribed the gifts of prophecy to pagans as
well as Israelites at least as late as the erection of the Tabernacle,
after which the Divine Presence dwelt there in the
midst of Israel.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Seder Olam</hi>
R., I and XXI; Lev. Rab. I, 12-14; B. B. 15 b.</note>
They say that each of the Jewish prophets
was endowed with a peculiar spiritual power that corresponded
with his character and his special training, the highest, of course,
being Moses, whom they called <q>the father of the prophets.</q><note place='foot'>Hag.
13 b; Sanh. 89 a; Lev. R. l. c.</note>
</p>

<p>
The medieval Jewish thinkers, following the lead of
Mohammedan philosophers or theologians, regard revelation
quite differently, as an <emph>inner</emph> process in the mind of the prophet.
According to their mystical or rationalistic viewpoint, they
describe it as the result of the divine spirit, working upon the
soul either from within or from without. These two standpoints
betray either the Platonic or the Aristotelian influence.<note place='foot'>See Schmiedl:
<hi rend='italic'>Stud. u. jued.-arabische Religionsphilosophie</hi>, 191-192;
S. Horowitz: <hi rend='italic'>D. Prophetologie i. d. jued. Religionsphilosophie</hi>;
Sandler: <hi rend='italic'>D. Problem d. Prophetie i. d. jued.
Religionsphilosophie</hi>; J. E., art. Prophets and Prophecy;
<hi rend='italic'>Emunoth</hi> III, 4; <hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>, I, 95;
II, 10-12; <hi rend='italic'>Emunah Ramah</hi>, II,
5, 1; <hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>, II, 32-48; <hi rend='italic'>Yesode ha Torah</hi>,
VII; <hi rend='italic'>Or Adonai</hi>, II, 4, 1; <hi rend='italic'>Ikkarim</hi>,
III, 8-12, 17; Nachmanides to Gen. XVIII, 2; Abravanel to Gen. XXI, 27;
Comp. Husik, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Med. Jew. Phil.</hi>, Index s. v. Prophecy; Enc.
Rel. Ethics, art. Philosophy and Prophecy.</note>
Indeed, the rabbis themselves showed traces of neo-Platonism
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
when they described the ecstatic state of the prophets, or
when they spoke of the divine spirit speaking through the
prophet as through a vocal instrument, or when they made
distinctions between seeing the Deity <q>in a bright mirror</q>
or <q>through a dark glass.</q><note place='foot'>Horowitz,
l. c. p. 11-16; Gen. R. XVII, 6; Lev. R, l. c; Sanh. 17 b;
Philo: De Decalog., 21; de Migratione Abrahami, 7; comp. I Corinth. XIII,
12.</note>
</p>

<p>
The view most remote from the simple one of the Bible is
the rationalistic standpoint of Maimonides, who, following
altogether in the footsteps of the Arabic neo-Aristotelians,
assumed that there were different degrees of prophecy, depending
upon the influence exerted upon the human intellect
by the sphere of the Highest Intelligence. He enumerates
eleven such grades, of which Moses had the highest rank, as he
entered into direct communication with the supreme intellectual
sphere. Still bolder is his explanation of the revelation
on Sinai. He holds that the first two words were understood
by the people directly as logical evidences of truth, for
they enunciated the philosophical doctrines of the existence
and unity of God, whereas the other words they understood
only as sounds without meaning, so that Moses had to interpret
them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>, l. c.</note>
In contrast to this amazing rationalism of Maimonides
is the view of Jehuda ha Levi, who asserts that the
gift of prophecy became the specific privilege of the descendants
of Abraham after their consecration as God's chosen
people at Sinai, and that the holy soil of Palestine was assigned to them as the
habitation best adapted to its exercise.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>,
l. c.</note> The other attempt of some rationalistic thinkers of the Middle Ages to have
a <q>sound created for the purpose</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Kol
Nibra</hi>: <hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>, I, 65; <hi rend='italic'>Emunoth</hi>,
II, 8; <hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>, I, 89.</note> of uttering
the words <q>I am the Lord thy God,</q> rather than accepting
the anthropomorphic Deity, merits no consideration whatever.
</p>

<p>
7. It is an indisputable fact of history that the Jewish people,
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
on account of its peculiar religious bent, was predestined to
be the people of revelation. Its leading spirits, its prophets
and psalmists, its law-givers and inspired writers differ from
the seers, singers, and sages of other nations by their unique
and profound insight into the moral nature of the Deity. In
striking contrast is the progress of thought in Greece, where
the awakening of the ethical consciousness caused a rupture
between the culture of the philosophers and the popular
religion, and led to a final decay of the political and social
life. The prophets of Israel, however, the typical men of
genius of their people, gradually brought about an advance
of popular religion, so that they could finally present as their
highest ideal the God of the fathers, and make the knowledge
of His will the foundation of the law of holiness, by
which they desired to regulate the entire conduct of man.
Thus, religion was no longer confined by the limits of nationality,
but was transformed into a spiritual force for all mankind,
to lead through a revelation of the One and Holy God
toward the highest morality.
</p>

<p>
8. The development of thought brought the God-seeking
spirits to the desire to know His will, or, in Scriptural language,
His ways, in order to attain holiness in their pursuit. The
natural consequence was the gradual receding of the power of
imagination which had made the enraptured seer behold God
Himself in visions. As the Deity rose more and more above
the realm of the visible, the newly conceived truth was realized
as coming to the sacred writer through the spirit of God
or an angel. <emph>Inspiration</emph> took the place of <emph>revelation</emph>. This,
however, still implies a passive attitude of the soul carried
away by the truth it receives from on high. This supernatural
element disappears gradually and passes over into sober, self-conscious
thought, in which the writer no longer thinks of
God as the Ego speaking through him, but as an outside
Power spoken of in the third person.
</p>

<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>

<p>
A still lower degree of inspiration is represented by those
writings which lack altogether the divine afflatus, and to
which is ascribed a share of the holy spirit only through general
consensus of opinion. Often this imprint of the divine
is not found in them by the calm judgment of a later generation,
and the exact basis for the classification of such
writings among the holy books is sometimes difficult to state.
We can only conclude that in the course of time they were
regarded as holy by that very spirit which was embodied in
the Synagogue and its founders, <q>the Men of the Great
Synagogue,</q> who in their work of canonizing the Sacred
Scriptures were believed to have been under the influence of
the holy spirit.<note place='foot'>According to the
rabbis, the working of the holy spirit ceased with Haggai,
Zechariah, and Malachi, who, with Ezra, were included also among the <q>Men
of the Great Synagogue.</q> See Tos. Sota XIII, 2; Seder Olam R. XXX;
Sanh. 11 a. See J. E., art. Synagogue, Men of the Great; Holy Spirit; Inspiration.
Comp. B. B. 14 b, 15 a; Yoma 9 b; Meg. 3 a, 7 a; I Macc. IV, 46;
Ps. LXXIV, 9; Josephus, <hi rend='italic'>Con. Apion.</hi>, I, 8;
Philo: <hi rend='italic'>Vita Mosis</hi>, II, 7; Aristeas,
305-307. As to the difference between the spirit of prophecy and the holy
spirit, see <hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>, III, 32-35;
<hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>, II, 35-37. The Essenes claimed the
holy spirit for their apocryphal writings; see IV Esdras XIV, 38; Book of
Wisdom VII, 27.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. Except for the five books of Moses, the idea of a mechanical
inspiration of the Bible is quite foreign to Judaism.
Not until the second Christian century did the rabbis
finally decide on such questions as the inspiration of certain
books among the Hagiographa or even among the Prophets,
or whether certain books now excluded from the canon were
not of equal rank with the canonical ones.<note place='foot'>On the
disputes concerning canonical books, see Yadayim III, 5; Ab. d.
R. N., I, ed. Schechter, 2-3; Shab. 30 b; Meg. 7 a. Comp. B. K. 92 b, where
Ben Sira is quoted as one of the Hagiographa.</note> In fact, the influence
of the holy spirit was for some time ascribed, not only
to Biblical writers, but also to living masters of the law.<note place='foot'>See
Tos. Pes. I, 27; IV, 2; Sota XIII, 3; Yer. Horay. III, 48 c; Lev.
R. XXI, 7.</note>
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
The fact is that divine influence cannot be measured by the
yardstick or the calendar. Where it is felt, it bursts forth as
from a higher world, creating for itself its proper organs
and forms. The rabbis portray God as saying to Israel,
<q>Not I in My higher realm, but you with your human needs
fix the form, the measure, the time, and the mode of expression
for that which is divine.</q><note place='foot'>R. h. Sh. 27 a; Mak. 22 b.</note>
</p>

<p>
10. While Christianity and Islam, its daughter-religions,
must admit the existence of a prior revelation, Judaism knows
of none. It claims its own prophetic truth as <emph>the</emph> revelation,
admits the title Books of Revelation (Bible) only for its own
sacred writings, and calls the Jewish nation alone the People
of Revelation. The Church and the Mosque achieved great
things in propagating the truths of the Sinaitic revelation
among the nations, but added to it no new truths of an essential
nature. Indeed, they rather obscured the doctrines
of God's unity and holiness. On the other hand, the people
of the Sinaitic revelation looked to it with a view of ever
revitalizing the dead letter, thus evolving ever new rules of
life and new ideas, without ever placing new and old in opposition,
as was done by the founder of the Church. Each
generation was to take to heart the words of Scripture as if
they had come <q>this very day</q> out of the mouth of the
Lord.<note place='foot'>Sifre Deut. VI, 4.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. The Torah&mdash;the Divine Instruction</head>

<p>
1. During the Babylonian Exile the prophetic word became
the source of comfort and rejuvenation for the Jewish people.
Now in its place Ezra the Scribe made the Book of the Law
of Moses the pivot about which the entire life of the people
was to revolve. By regular readings from it to the assembled
worshipers, he made it the source of common instruction.
Instead of the priestly Law, which was concerned only with
the regulation of the ritual life, the Law became the people's
book of instruction, a Torah for all alike,<note place='foot'>On the
term Torah see Smend: <hi rend='italic'>Lehrb. d. alttest. Religionsgesch.</hi>; Stade:
Bibl. Theol. d. Alt. Test., Index s. v. Torah; W. J. Beecher: <hi rend='italic'>Jour.
Bibl. Lit.</hi>, 1905, 1-16; <q>Thora a Word Study in the Old Testament.</q> For Torah as
<emph>Law</emph>, see Neh. VIII, 1; Joshua I, 7, and throughout the Pentateuch; as
<emph>moral instruction</emph>, see Hos. IV, 6; VIII, 1; Is. I, 10; V, 24; XXX, 9;
LI, 4; Mic. IV, 2; Jer. XXXVI, 4 f.; XXXI, 32; Ps. XVI, 8; Prov. VI, 22; VII, 2;
Guedeman: <hi rend='italic'>Quell. z. G. d. Unterrichts</hi>, at the beginning; Claude
Montefiore: <hi rend='italic'>Hibbert Lectures</hi>, 1892, p. 465 f.</note>
while the prophetic
books were made secondary and were employed by the preacher
at the conclusion of the service as <q>words of
consolation.</q><note place='foot'><foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Nehematha</foreign>,
which means the Messianic hope; see Kohut: Aruch V, 328
and Appendix 59.</note>
Upon the Pentateuch was built up the divine service of the
Synagogue as well as the whole system of communal life,
with both its law and ethics. The prophets and other sacred
books were looked upon only as means of <q>opening up</q> or
illustrating the contents of the Torah. These other parts of
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Mikra</foreign>
(<q>the collection of books for public reading</q>) were
declared to be inferior in holiness, so that, according to the
Rabbinical rule, they were not even allowed to be put into
the same scroll as the Pentateuch.<note place='foot'>See B. B. 13 b;
Meg. III, 1; IV, 4; comp. Ned. 22 b; Taan. 9 a; Shab.
104 a; <hi rend='italic'>Sifra</hi> Behukothai at end; Eccl. R. I, 10; Ex. R. XXXVIII,
6. Zunz: <hi rend='italic'>Gottesd. Vortr.</hi>, 46 f., and art.
<hi rend='italic'>Canon</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Bible</hi> in the various
encyclopedias. As to Torah for the whole Bible, see Mek. Shira I; Sanh. 37 a, 91 b; Ab.
Zar. 17 a; M. K. 5 a; comp. I Cor. XIV, 21; John X, 34; XII, 34; XV, 25.
For Torah as Nomos, or Law, see II Macc. XV, 9.</note> Moreover, neither the
number, order, nor the division of the Biblical books was
fixed. The Talmud gives 24, Josephus only 22.<note place='foot'>Bousset, l. c.,
128-129.</note> Tradition
claims a completely divine origin only for the Pentateuch or
Torah, while the rabbis often point out the human element in
the other two classes of the Biblical collection.<note place='foot'>On the
divine origin of the Torah, see Sanh. 99 a; <hi rend='italic'>Sifra</hi> Kedoshim 8;
Behar I; Behukothay 8. Regarding the meaning of
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>metammin eth ha yadayim</foreign>
in the sense of taboo for the holy writings, see Geiger:
<hi rend='italic'>Urschrift</hi>, p. 146.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. The traditional belief in the divine origin of the Torah
includes not only every word, but also the accepted interpretation
of each letter, for both written and oral law are
ascribed to the revelation to Moses on Mt. Sinai, to be transmitted
thence from generation to generation. Whoever
denies the divine origin of either the written or the oral law
is declared to be an unbeliever who has no share in the world
to come, according to the Tannaitic code, and consequently
according to Maimonides<note place='foot'>Sanh. 99 a; Maim. H. Teshubah
III, 8.</note> also. But here arises a question
of vital importance: What becomes of the Torah as the
divine foundation of Judaism under the study of modern
times? Even conservative investigators, such as Frankel,
Graetz, and Isaac Hirsch Weiss, not to mention such radicals
as Zunz and Geiger, admit the gradual progress and growth
of this very system of law, both oral and written. And if
different historical conditions have produced the development
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
of the law itself, we must assume a number of human authors
in place of a single act of divine revelation.<note place='foot'>Comp. Kohler:
<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew Union College Annual</hi>, 1904, <q>The Four Ells of
the Halakah.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
3. But another question of equal importance confronts us
here, the meaning of Torah. Originally, no doubt, Torah
signified the instruction given by the priests on ritual or juridical
matters. Out of these decisions arose the written laws
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Toroth</foreign>),
which the priesthood in the course of time collected
into codes. After a further process of development they appeared
as the various books of Moses, which were finally
united into <emph>the Code</emph> or
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Torah</foreign>. This Torah was the foundation
of the new Judean commonwealth, the <q>heritage of
the congregation of Jacob.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XXXIII,
4.</note> The priestly Torah, lightly
regarded during the prophetic period, was exalted by post-exilic
Judaism, so that the Sadducean priesthood and their
successors, the rabbis, considered strict observance of the
legal form to be the very essence of religion. Is this, then,
the true nature of Judaism? Is it really&mdash;as Christian
theologians have held ever since the days of Paul, the great
antagonist of Judaism&mdash;mere nomism, a religion of law,
which demanded formal compliance with its statutes without
regard to their inner value? Or shall we rather follow Rabbi
Simlai, the Haggadist, who first enumerated the 613 commandments
of the Torah (mandatory and prohibitive), considering
that their one aim is the higher <emph>moral law</emph>, in that
they are all summed up by a few ethical principles, which
he finds in the 15th Psalm, Isaiah XXXIII, 15; Micah VI,
8; Isaiah LVI, 1; and Amos V, 4?<note place='foot'>Mak. 23 b.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. All these questions have but one answer, a reconciling
one, Judaism has the two factors, the priest with his regard
for the law and the prophet with his ethical teaching; and
the Jewish Torah embodies both aspects, law and doctrine.
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
These two elements became more and more correlated, as the
different parts of the Pentateuch which embodied them were
molded together into the one scroll of the Law. In fact, the
prophet Jeremiah, in denouncing the priesthood for its neglect
of the principles of justice, and rebuking scathingly the
people for their wrongdoing, pointed to the divine law of
righteousness as the one which should be written upon the
hearts of men.<note place='foot'>Jerem. XXXI, 32.</note>
Likewise, in the book of Deuteronomy,
which was the product of joint activity by prophet and priest,
the Law was built upon the highest moral principle, the love
of God and man. In a still larger sense the Pentateuch as a
whole contains priestly law and universal religion intertwined.
In it the eternal verities of the Jewish faith, God's
omnipotence, omniscience, and moral government of the world,
are conveyed in the historical narratives as an introduction
to the law.
</p>

<p>
5. Thus the Torah as the expression of Judaism was never
limited to a mere system of law. At the outset it served as
a book of instruction concerning God and the world and
became ever richer as a source of knowledge and speculation,
because all knowledge from other sources was brought into
relation with it through new modes of interpretation. Various
systems of philosophy and theology were built upon it. Nay
more, the Torah became divine Wisdom itself,<note place='foot'>Comp. Schechter,
<hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>, p. 120-136, and see Ben Sira, XXIV, 8-23;
XVII, 11; Baruch III, 38 f.; Apoc. Baruch XXXVIII, 4; XLIV, 16; IV
Esdras VIII, 12; IX, 37; Philo: <hi rend='italic'>Vita Mosis</hi>,
II, 3, 9; Gen. R. I; P. d. R. El. III.</note> the architect
of the Creator, the beginning and end of creation.<note place='foot'>This
apotheosis of the Torah is put in a wrong light by Weber, <hi rend='italic'>Juedische
Theologie</hi>, 157 f., 197, but is stated better in Bousset, l. c., 136-142.</note>
</p>

<p>
While the term Torah thus received an increasingly comprehensive
meaning, the rabbis, as exponents of orthodox Judaism,
came to consider the Pentateuch as the only book of revelation,
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
every letter of which emanated directly from God. The
other books of the Bible they regarded as due only to the
indwelling of the holy spirit, or to the presence of God, the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shekinah</foreign>.
Moreover, they held that changes by the prophets
and other sacred writers were anticipated, in essentials, in
the Torah itself, and were therefore only its expansions and
interpretations. Accordingly, they are frequently quoted as parts of the Torah
or as <q>words of tradition.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Dibre
Kabbalah</hi>, R. h. Sh. 7 a, 19 a; Yer. Halla I, 57 b; see Levy, W. B.,
s. v. Kabbalah.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. Orthodox Judaism, then, accepted as a fundamental
doctrine the view that both the Mosaic Law and its Rabbinical
interpretation were given by God to Moses on Mt. Sinai.
This viewpoint is contradicted by all our knowledge and our
whole mode of thinking, and thus both our historical and
religious consciousness constrain us to take the position of
the prophets. To them and to us the real Torah is the unwritten
moral law which underlies the precepts of both the
written law and its oral interpretation. From this point of
view, Moses, as the first of the prophets, becomes the first
mediator of the divine legislation, and the original Decalogue
is seen to be the starting point of a long process of development,
from which grew the laws of righteousness and holiness
that were to rule the life of Israel and of mankind.<note place='foot'>The personality
of Moses was at first exalted to almost superhuman height;
see <hi rend='italic'>Ben Sira</hi>, XLV, 2; <hi rend='italic'>Assumptio Mosis</hi>,
I, 14; XI, 16; Philo: <hi rend='italic'>Vita Mosis</hi>, III, 39; Josephus:
<hi rend='italic'>Antiquities</hi>, IV, 32 b; Bousset, l. c., 140 f. In contrast
to the Church view of Jesus the rabbis later emphasized the human frailties
of Moses: <q>Never did divine majesty descend to the habitations of mortal
man, nor did ever a mortal man such as Moses and Elijah ascend to heaven,
the dwelling-place of God,</q> taught Rabbi Jose (Suk. 5 a).</note>
</p>

<p>
7. The time of composition of the various parts of the
Pentateuch, including the Decalogue, must be decided by
independent critical and historical research. It is sufficient
for us to know that since the time of Ezra the foundation of
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
Judaism has been the completed Torah, with its twofold
aspect as <emph>law</emph> and as <emph>doctrine</emph>.
As <emph>law</emph> it contributed to the
marvelous endurance and resistance of the Jewish people,
inasmuch as it imbued them with the proud consciousness of
possessing a law superior to that of other nations, one which
would endure as long as heaven and earth.<note place='foot'>See Deut.
IV, 6-8; Jer. XXXI, 34-35; Philo: <hi rend='italic'>Vita Mosis</hi>, II, 14; Josephus:
<hi rend='italic'>Apion</hi>, II, 277.</note> Furthermore, it
permeated Judaism with a keen sense of duty and imprinted
the ideal of holiness upon the whole of life. At the same
time it gave rise also to ritualistic piety, which, while tenaciously
clinging to the traditional practice of the law, fostered
hair-splitting casuistry and caused the petrifaction of religion
in the codified Halakah. As <emph>doctrine</emph> it impressed its
ethical and humane idealism upon the people, lifting them
far above the narrow confines of nationality, and making
them a nation of thinkers. Hence their eagerness for their
mission to impart the wisdom stored in their writings to all
humanity as its highest boon and the very essence of divine
wisdom.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. God's Covenant</head>

<p>
1. Judaism has one specific term for religion, representing
the moral relation between God and man, namely,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Berith</foreign>,
covenant. The covenant was concluded by God with the
patriarchs and with Israel by means of sacrificial blood, according
to the primitive custom by which tribes or individuals
became <q>blood brothers,</q> when they were both sprinkled
with the sacrificial blood or both drank of it.<note place='foot'>See Herodotus,
III, 8; IV, 70; Jer. XXIV, 18; H. Clay Trumbull: <hi rend='italic'>The
Blood Covenant</hi>, New York, 1885; Kraetschmar: <hi rend='italic'>D. Bundervorstellung
i. A. Test.</hi>, 1896; J. E. and Encyl. of Rel. and Ethics, art. Covenant.</note>
The first covenant
of God was made after the flood, with Noah as the representative
of mankind; it was intended to assure him and
all coming generations of the perpetual maintenance of the
natural order without interruption by flood, and at the same
time to demand of all mankind the observance of certain laws,
such as not to shed, or eat, blood. Here at the very beginning
of history religion is taken as the universal basis of human
morality, so developing at the outset the fundamental principle
of Judaism that it rests upon a religion of humanity,
which it desires to establish in all purity. As the universal
idea of man forms thus its beginning, so Judaism will attain
its final goal only in a divine covenant comprising all humanity.
Both the rabbis and the Hellenistic writers consider
the covenant of Noah with its so-called Noahitic commandments
as unwritten laws of humanity. In fact, they
are referred to Adam also, so that religion appears in its
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
essence as nothing else than a covenant of God with all
mankind.<note place='foot'>See Gen. IX, 1-17; Tos. Ab. Zar. VIII, 4; San. 56 a; Gen. R.
XVI, XXIV; Jubilees VI, 10 f.; Bernays: <hi rend='italic'>Ges. Abh.</hi> I, 252 f., 272
f.; II, 71-80.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. Accordingly, Judaism is a special basis of relationship
between God and Israel. Far from superseding the universal
covenant with Noah, or confining it to the Jewish people,
this covenant aims to reclaim all members of the human
family for the wider covenant from which they have relapsed.
God chose for this purpose Abraham as the one who was
faithful to His moral law, and made a special covenant with
him for all his descendants, that they might foster justice
and righteousness, at first within the narrow sphere of the
nation, and then in ever-widening circles of humanity.<note place='foot'>Gen. XV, 18;
XVII, 2 f.; XVIII, 19; Lev. XXVI, 42; Jubilees I, 51.</note>
Yet the covenant with Abraham was only the precursor of
the covenant concluded with Israel through Moses on Mt.
Sinai, by which the Jewish people were consecrated to be the
eternal guardians of the divine covenant with mankind, until
the time when it shall encompass all the nations.<note place='foot'>Ex. XIX, 5;
XXIV, 6-8; XXXIV, 28; Deut. IV-V, XXVIII, XXIX;
Comp. I Kings XIX, 10, 14; Jer. XI; XXXI; XXXIV, 13; Ezek. XVI-XVII.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. In this covenant of Sinai, referred to by the prophet
Elijah, and afterward by many others, the free moral relationship
of man to God is brought out; this forms the
characteristic feature of a revealed religion in contradistinction
to natural religion. In paganism the Deity formed an inseparable
part of the nation itself; but through the covenant
God became a free moral power, appealing for allegiance to
the spiritual nature of man. This idea of the covenant suggested
to the prophet Hosea the analogy with the conjugal
relation,<note place='foot'>Hos. II, 18-20.</note>
a conception of love and loyalty which became
typical of the tender relation of God to Israel through the
centuries. In days of direst woe Jeremiah and the book of
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
Deuteronomy invested this covenant with the character of
indestructibility and inviolability.<note place='foot'>Jer. XXXI, 30-32, 34-35;
XXXIII, 25; Deut. XXIX, 14.</note> God's covenant with
Israel is everlasting like that with the heaven and the earth;
it is ever to be renewed in the hearts of the people, but never
to be replaced by a new covenant. Upon this eternal renewal
of the covenant with God rests the unique history of Judaism,
its wondrous preservation and regeneration throughout the
ages. Paul's doctrine of a new covenant to replace the old<note place='foot'>See
Ep. Hebrews VIII, 8 f.; Gal. III, 15; I Cor. XI, 25; Matt. XXIV,
21, and parallels.</note>
conflicts with the very idea of the covenant, and even with the
words of Jeremiah.
</p>

<p>
4. The Israelitish nation inherited from Abraham, according
to the priestly Code, the rite of <emph>circumcision</emph> as a <q>sign of
the covenant,</q><note place='foot'>Gen. XVII, 11.</note>
but under the prophetic influence, with its
loathing of all sacrificial blood, the <emph>Sabbath</emph> was placed in the
foreground as <q>the sign between God and Israel.</q><note place='foot'>Ex. XXXI, 13-17;
comp. Deut. X, 16; Josh. V, 9; Isa. LVI, 4-6. See
Mek. to Ex. XIX, 5, the controversy between R. Eliezer and R. Akiba, whether
the Sabbath or circumcision was the essential sign of the covenant.</note> In
ancient Israel and in the Judean commonwealth the Abrahamitic
rite formed the initiation into the nationality for
aliens and slaves, by which they were made full-fledged Jews.
With the dispersion of the Jewish people over the globe, and
the influence of Hellenism, Judaism created a propaganda in
favor of a world-wide religion of <q>God-fearing</q> men pledged
to the observance of the Noahitic or humanitarian laws.
Rabbinism in Palestine called such a one
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger Toshab</foreign>&mdash;sojourner,
or semi-proselyte; while the full proselyte who accepted
the Abrahamitic rite was called <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger Zedek</foreign>,
or proselyte of righteousness.<note place='foot'>Ker. 9 a; Yeb. 45-48 and see Chapter
<ref target='Chapter_LVI'>LVI</ref> below.</note> Not only the Hellenistic writings, but
also the Psalms, the liturgy, and the older Rabbinical literature
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
give evidence of such a propaganda,<note place='foot'>Ps. XXII, 28 f.;
CXV, 11; CXVIII, 4; Is. LVI, 6.</note> but it may be traced
back as far as Deutero-Isaiah, during the reign of Cyrus. His
outlook toward a Jewish religion which should be at the same
time a religion of all the world, is evident when he calls Israel
<q>a mediator of the covenant between God and the nations,</q>
a <q>light to the peoples,</q>&mdash;a regenerator of humanity.<note place='foot'>Isaiah
XLIX, 6-8.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. This hope of a universal religion, which rings through
the Psalms, the Wisdom books and the Hellenistic literature,
was soon destined to grow faint. The perils of Judaism in
its great struggles with the Syrian and Roman empires made
for intense nationalism, and the Jewish covenant shared this
tendency. The early Christian Church, the successor of the
missionary activity of Hellenistic Judaism, labored also at
first for the Noahitic covenant.<note place='foot'>Acts XV,
20, 29.</note> Pauline Christianity, however,
with a view to tearing down the barrier between Jew
and Gentile, proclaimed a new covenant, whose central idea
is belief in the atoning power of the crucified son of God.<note place='foot'>See
J. E., art. Saul of Tarsus; Enc. Rel. Eth. art. Paul.</note>
Indeed, one medieval Rabbinical authority holds that we
are to regard Christians as semi-proselytes, as they practically
observe the Noahitic laws of humanity.<note place='foot'>Isaac ben Shesheth:
Responsa, 119. Comp, J. E., art. Christianity.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. Progressive Judaism of our own time has the great task
of re-emphasizing Israel's world-mission and of reclaiming
for Judaism its place as the priesthood of humanity. It is
to proclaim anew the prophetic idea of God's covenant with
humanity, whose force had been lost, owing to inner and
outer obstacles. Israel, as the people of the covenant, aims
to unite all nations and classes of men in the divine covenant.
It must outlast all other religions in its certainty that ultimately
there can be but the one religion, uniting God and
man by a single bond.<note place='foot'>See further, Chapter
<ref target='Chapter_XLIX'>XLIX</ref>.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>B. The Idea Of God In Judaism</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX. God and the Gods</head>

<p>
1. Judaism centers upon its sublime and simple conception
of God. This lifts it above all other religions and
satisfies in unique measure the longing for truth and inner
peace amidst the futility and incessant changes of earthly
existence. This very conception of God is in striking contrast
to that of most other religions. The God of Judaism is not
one god among many, nor one of many powers of life, but is
<emph>the One</emph> and holy God beyond all comparison. In Him is
concentrated all power and the essence of all things; He is
the Author of all existence, the Ruler of life, who lays down the
laws by which man shall live. As the prophet says to the
heathen world: <q>The gods that have not made the heavens
and the earth, these shall perish from the earth and from under
the heavens.... Not like these is the portion of Jacob;
for He is the Former of all things.... The Lord is the true
God; He is the living God and the everlasting King; at His
wrath the earth trembleth, and the nations are not able to
abide His indignation.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. X, 11; 16 and 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. This lofty conception of the Deity forms the essence of
Judaism and was its shield and buckler in its lifelong contest
with the varying forms of heathenism. From the very first
the God of Judaism declared war against them all, whether at
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
any special time the prevailing form was the worship of many
gods, or the worship of God in the shape of man, the perversion
of the purity of God by sensual concepts, or the division
of His unity into different parts or personalities. The
Talmudic saying is most striking: <q>From Sinai, the Mount
of revelation of the only God, there came forth
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Sinah</foreign>, the
hostility of the nations toward the Jew as the banner-bearer
of the pure idea of God.</q><note place='foot'>Shab. 89 b.</note>
Just as day and night form a
natural contrast, divinely ordained, so do the monotheism of
Israel and the polytheism of the nations constitute a spiritual
contrast which can never be reconciled.
</p>

<p>
3. The pagan gods, and to some extent the triune God of
the Christian Church, semi-pagan in origin also, are the outcome
of the human spirit's going astray in its search for God.
Instead of leading man upwards to an ideal which will encompass
all material and moral life and lift it to the highest stage of
holiness, paganism led to depravity and discord. The unrelenting
zeal displayed by prophet and law-giver against
idolatry had its chief cause in the immoral and inhuman practices
of the pagan nations&mdash;Canaan, Egypt, Assyria, and
Babylon&mdash;in the worship of their deities.<note place='foot'>Lev. XVIII, 2, 27 f.;
Num. XXV, 3-8; Hos. IV, 10; V, 4.</note> The deification of
the forces of nature brutalized the moral sense of the pagan
world; no vice seemed too horrible, no sacrifice too atrocious
for their cults. Baal, or Moloch, the god of heaven, demanded
in times of distress the sacrifice of a son by the
father. Astarte, the goddess of fecundity, required the
<q>hallowing</q> of life's origin, and this was done by the most
terrible of sexual orgies. Such abominations exerted their seductive
influence upon the shepherd tribes of Israel in their
new home in Canaan, and thus aroused the fiercest indignation
of prophet and law-giver, who hurled their vials of wrath
against those shocking rites, those lewd idols, and those who
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
<q>whored after them.</q><note place='foot'>Num. XV, 39; Ex. XXIII, 24;
Deut. XX, 18; Sanh. XII, 5; X, 4-6;
Ab. Zar. II-IV; Sanh. 106 a: <q>Israel's God hates lewdness.</q></note>
If Israel was to be trained to be
the priest people of the Only One in such an environment,
tolerance of such practices was out of the question. Thus in
the Sinaitic law God is spoken of as <q>the jealous God</q><note place='foot'>Ex.
XX, 5; Deut. IV, 24; VI, 15.</note> who
punishes unrelentingly every violation of His laws of purity
and holiness.
</p>

<p>
4. The same sharp contrast of Jewish ethical and spiritual
monotheism remained also when it came in contact with the
Græco-Syrian and Roman culture. Here, too, the myths
and customs of the cult and the popular religion offended by
their gross sensuality the chaste spirit of the Jewish people.
Indeed, these were all the more dangerous to the purity of
social life, as they were garbed with the alluring beauty of
art and philosophy.<note place='foot'>See Philo: De Humanitate; Doellinger:
<hi rend='italic'>Heidenthum u. Judenthum</hi>, 682,
700 f.; I. H. Weiss: <hi rend='italic'>Dor Dor we Doreshav</hi>, II,
19 f.</note> The Jew then felt all the more the
imperative duty to draw a sharp line of demarcation between
Judaism with its chaste and imageless worship and the lascivious,
immoral life of paganism.
</p>

<p>
5. This wide gulf which yawned between Israel's One and
holy God and the divinities of the nations was not bridged
over by the Christian Church when it appeared on the stage
of history and obtained world-dominion. For Christianity
in its turn succeeded by again dragging the Deity into the
world of the senses, adopting the pagan myths of the birth
and death of the gods, and sanctioning image worship. In
this way it actually created a Christian plurality of gods in
place of the Græco-Roman pantheon; indeed, it presented a
divine family after the model of the Egyptian and Babylonian
religions,<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Christianity.</note>
and thus pushed the ever-living God and Father of
mankind into the background. This tendency has never been
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
explained away, even by the attempts of certain high-minded
thinkers among the Church fathers. Judaism, however, insists,
as ever, upon the words of the Decalogue which condemn
all attempts to depict the Deity in human or sensual
form, and through all its teachings there is echoed forth the
voice of Him who spoke through the seer of the Exile: <q>I
am the Lord, that is My name, and My glory will I not give
to another, neither My praise to graven images.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XLII,
8. Scripture always emphasizes the contrast between Israel's
God and the heathen gods. See Ex. XII, 12; XV, 11; XVIII, 11; Deut.
X, 17; also in the prophets, Isa. XL; XLIV, 9; Jer. X; and the Psalms,
XCVI, CXV, CXXXV. Absolute monotheism was a slow growth from this
basis.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. When Moses came to Pharaoh saying, <q>Thus speaketh
JHVH the God of Israel, send off My people that they may
serve Me,</q> Pharaoh&mdash;so the Midrash tells&mdash;took his list
of deities to hand, looked it over, and said, <q>Behold, here are
enumerated the gods of the nations, but I cannot find thy God
among them.</q> To this Moses replied, <q>All the gods known
and familiar to thee are mortal, as thou art; they die, and
their tomb is shown. The God of Israel has nothing in common
with them. He is the living, true, and eternal God who
created heaven and earth; no people can withstand His wrath.</q><note place='foot'>See
Ex. R. V, 18.</note>
This passage states strikingly the difference between the God
of Judaism and the gods of heathendom. The latter are but
deified powers of nature, and being parts of the world, themselves
at one with nature, they are subject to the power of
time and fate. Israel's God is enthroned above the world
as its moral and spiritual Ruler, the only Being whom we can
conceive as self-existent, as indivisible as truth itself.
</p>

<p>
7. As long as the pagan conception prevailed, by which
the world was divided into many divine powers, there could
be no conception of the idea of a moral government of the universe,
of an all-encompassing purpose of life. Consequently
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
the great thinkers and moralists of heathendom were forced
to deny the deities, before they could assert either the unity of
the cosmos or a design in life. On the other hand, it was precisely
this recognition of the moral nature of God, as manifested
both in human life and in the cosmic sphere, which brought
the Jewish prophets and sages to their pure monotheism, in
which they will ultimately be met by the great thinkers of
all lands and ages. The unity of God brings harmony into
the intellectual and moral world; the division of the godhead
into different powers or personalities leads to discord and
spiritual bondage. Such is the lesson of history, that in polytheism,
dualism, or trinitarianism one of the powers must
necessarily limit or obscure another. In this manner the
Christian Trinity led mankind in many ways to the lowering
of the supreme standard of truth, to an infringement on justice,
and to inhumanity to other creeds, and therefore Judaism
could regard it only as a compromise with heathenism.
</p>

<p>
8. Judaism assumed, then, toward paganism an attitude
of rigid exclusion and opposition which could easily be taken
for hostility. This prevailed especially in the legal systems
of the Bible and the rabbis, and was intended primarily to
guard the monotheistic belief from pagan pollution and to
keep it intact. Neither in the Deuteronomic law nor in the
late codes of Maimonides and Joseph Caro is there any toleration
for idolatrous practices, for instruments of idol-worship,
or for idolaters.<note place='foot'>Deut. VII; XVII, 2 f.; XX, 16;
Maimonides: <hi rend='italic'>H. Akkum</hi>, II-VII;
<hi rend='italic'>Melakim</hi>, VI, 4; <hi rend='italic'>Yoreh Deah</hi>,
CXII-XLVIII.</note> This attitude gave the enemies of
the Jew sufficient occasion for speaking of the Jewish God as
hating the world, as if only national conceit underlay the
earnest rigor of Jewish monotheism.
</p>

<p>
9. As a matter of fact, since the time of the prophets Judaism
has had no national God in any exclusive sense. While
the Law insists upon the exclusive worship of the one God of
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
Israel, the narratives of the beginnings in the Bible have a
different tenor. They take the lofty standpoint that the
heathen world, while worshiping its many divinities, had
merely lost sight of the true God after whom the heart ever
longs and searches. This implies that a kernel of true piety
underlies all the error and delusion of paganism, which,
rightly guided, will lead back to the God from whom mankind
had strayed. The Godhead, divided into gods&mdash;as is hinted
even in the Biblical name, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign>&mdash;must
again become the
one God of humanity. Thus the Jew holds that all worship
foreshadows the search for the true God, and that all humanity
shall at one time acknowledge Him for whom they
have so long been searching. Surely the Psalms express, not
national narrowness, but ardent love for humanity when
they hail the God of Israel, the Maker of heaven and earth,
as the world's great King, and tell how He will judge the
nations in justice, while the gods of the nations will be rejected
as <q>vanities.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XCVI-XCIX.</note>
Nor does the divine service of the Jew bear
the stamp of clannishness. For more than two thousand
years the central point in the Synagogue liturgy every morning
and evening has been the battle-cry, <q>Hear, O Israel, the
Lord our God, the Lord is One.</q> And so does the conclusion
of every service, the <foreign rend='italic'>Alenu</foreign>, the solemn prayer of
adoration, voice the grand hope of the Jew for the future, that the time
may speedily come when <q>before the kingdom of Almighty
all idolatry shall vanish, and all the inhabitants of the earth
perceive that unto Him alone every knee must bend, and all
flesh recognize Him alone as God and King.</q><note place='foot'>See Singer's
<hi rend='italic'>Prayerbook</hi>, p, 76-77, and J. E., art. Alenu.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X. The Name of God</head>

<p>
1. Primitive men attached much importance to names,
for to them the name of a thing indicated its nature, and
through the name one could obtain mastery over the thing or
person named. Accordingly, the name of God was considered
to be the manifestation of His being; by invoking it
man could obtain some of His power; and the place where
that name was called became the seat of His presence. Therefore
the name must be treated with the same reverential awe
as the Deity Himself. None dare approach the Deity, nor
misuse the Name. The pious soul realized the nearness of
the Deity in hearing His name pronounced. Finally, the
different names of God reflect the different conceptions of
Him which were held in various periods.<note place='foot'>See Cheyne's Dict. Bibl.
art. Name and Names with Bibliography; Jacob:
<hi rend='italic'>Im Namen Gottes</hi>; Heitmueller,
<hi rend='italic'>Im Namen Jesu</hi>, 1903, p. 24-25. The <emph>Name</emph> for
the Lord occurs Lev, XXIV, 11, 16; Deut. XXVIII, 58; Geiger,
<hi rend='italic'>Urschrift</hi>, 261 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. The Semites were not like the Aryan nations, who beheld
the essence of their gods in the phenomena of nature such
as light, rain, thunder, and lightning,&mdash;and gave them corresponding
names and titles. The more intense religious
emotionalism of the Semites<note place='foot'>See Baudissin,
<hi rend='italic'>Stud. z. Sem. Religionsgesch.</hi>, I, 47; 177; Robinson Smith:
<hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Semites</hi>; Max Mueller,
<hi rend='italic'>Chips from a German Workshop</hi>, I,
336-374.</note> perceived the Godhead rather
as a power working from within, and accordingly gave it such
names as <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>El</foreign> (<q>the Mighty One</q>),
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Eloha</foreign> or
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Pahad</foreign> (<q>the
Awful One</q>), or <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Baal</foreign> (<q>the Master</q>).
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign>, the plural
form of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Eloha</foreign>,
denoted originally the godhead as divided into
a number of gods or godly beings, that is, polytheism. When
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
it was applied to God, however, it was generally understood
as a <emph>unity</emph>, referring to one undivided Godhead, for Scripture
regarded monotheism as original with mankind. While
this view is contradicted by the science of comparative religion,
still the ideal conception of religion, based on the
universal consciousness of God, postulates one God who is
the aim of all human searching, a fact which the term Henotheism
fails to recognize.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. God.
Comp. also Encycl. of Religion and Ethics, art. God.
Primitive and Biblical; Name of God, Jewish.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. For the patriarchal age, the preliminary stage in the
development of the Jewish God-idea, Scripture gives a special
name for God, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>El Shaddai</foreign>&mdash;<q>the
Almighty God.</q> This probably has a relation to
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shod</foreign>, <q>storm</q> or <q>havoc</q> and
<q>destruction,</q> but was interpreted as supreme Ruler over the
celestial powers.<note place='foot'>Gen. XVII, 11; Ex.
VI, 3, and commentators; Gen. R. XLVI. The
Book of Job, where the name
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shaddai</foreign>
is constantly used, refers to the patriarchal age.</note>
The name by which God revealed Himself
to Moses and the prophets as the God of the covenant with
Israel is JHVH (Jahveh). This name is inseparably connected
with the religious development of Judaism in all its
loftiness and depth. During the period of the Second Temple
this name was declared too sacred for utterance, except by
the priests in certain parts of the service, and for mysterious
use by specially initiated saints. Instead,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Adonai</foreign>&mdash;<q>the
Lord</q>&mdash;was substituted for it in the Biblical reading, a
usage which has continued for over two thousand years.
The meaning of the name in pre-Mosaic times may be inferred
from the fiery storms which accompanied each theophany in
the various Scriptural passages, as well as from the root
havah, which means <q>throw down</q> and <q>overthrow.</q><note place='foot'>Ex. III,
14, and commentators, espec. Dillmann. Comp. art. Jahweh in
Prot. Realencyc. and Cheyne's Dict. Bible, art. <hi rend='italic'>Names</hi>, § 109
ff., where different etymologies are given.</note>
</p>

<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>

<p>
To the prophets, however, the God of Sinai, enthroned amid
clouds of storm and fire, moving before His people in war
and peace, appeared rather as the God of the Covenant, without
image or form, unapproachable in His holiness. As the
original meaning of JHVH had become unintelligible, they
interpreted the name as <q>the ever present One,</q> in the sense
of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ehyeh asher Ehyeh</foreign>,
<q>I shall be whatever (or wherever) I
am to be</q>; that is, <q>I am ever ready to help.</q> Thus spoke
God to Moses in revealing His name to him at the burning
bush.<note place='foot'>Ex. III, 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. The prophetic genius penetrated more and more into
the nature of God, recognising Him as the Power who rules
in justice, mercy, and holiness. This process brought them
to identify JHVH, the God of the covenant, with the One
and only God who overlooks all the world from his heavenly
habitation, and gives it plan and purpose. At the same time,
all the prophets revert to the covenant on Sinai in order to
proclaim Israel as the herald and witness of God among the
nations. In fact, the God of the covenant proclaimed His
universality at the very beginning, in the introduction to the
Decalogue: <q>Ye shall be Mine own peculiar possession from
among all peoples, for all the earth is Mine. And ye shall
be unto Me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.</q><note place='foot'>Ex.
XIX, 5, 6.</note> In
other words,&mdash;you have the special task of mediator among
the nations, all of which are under My dominion.
</p>

<p>
5. In the Wisdom literature and the Psalms the God of
the covenant is subordinated to the universality of JHVH as
Creator and Ruler of the world. In a number of the Psalms
and in some later writings the very name JHVH was avoided
probably on account of its particularistic tinge. It was
surrounded more and more with a certain mystery. Instead,
God as the <q>Lord</q> is impressed on the consciousness and
adoration of men, in all His sublimity and in absolute unity.
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
The <q>Name</q> continues its separate existence only in the
mystic lore. The name <foreign rend='italic'>Jehovah</foreign>,
however, has no place whatsoever
in Judaism. It is due simply to a misreading of the
vowel signs that refer to the word
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Adonai</foreign>, and has been
erroneously adopted in the Christian literature since the
beginning of the sixteenth century.<note place='foot'>See Prot.
Enc., art. Jahveh, p, 530 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. Perhaps the most important process of spiritualization
which the idea of God underwent in the minds of the Jewish
people was made when the name JHVH as the proper name of
the God of the covenant was given up and replaced by
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Adonai</foreign>&mdash;<q>the
Lord.</q> As long as the God of Israel, like other
deities, had His proper name, he was practically one of them,
however superior in moral worth. As soon as He became
<emph>the</emph> Lord, that is, the only real God over all the world, a distinctive
proper noun was out of place. Henceforth the
name was invested with a mysterious and magic character.
It became ineffable, at least to the people at large, and its
pronunciation sinful, except by the priests in the liturgy.
In fact, the law was interpreted so as directly to forbid this
utterance.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Adonai; Bousset, l. c., 352
f.</note> Thus JHVH is no longer the national God of
Israel. The Talmud guards against the very suspicion of a
<q>Judaized God</q> by insisting that every benediction to Him as
<q>God the Lord</q> must add <q>King of the Universe</q> rather than
the formula of the Psalms, <q>God of Israel.</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 40 b. On
the alleged <q>Judaisirung des Gottesbegriffs,</q> see Weber,
l. c., 148-158.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. The Midrash makes a significant comment on the words
of the Shema: <q>Why do the words, <q>the Lord is our God</q>
precede the words, <q>the Lord is One</q>? Does not the particularism
of the former conflict with the universalism of the
latter sentence? No. The former expresses the idea that the
Lord is <q>our God</q> just so far as His name is more intertwined
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
with our history than with that of any other nation, and
that we have the greater obligation as His chosen people.
Wherever Scripture speaks of the God of Israel, it does not
intend to limit Him as the universal God, but to emphasize
Israel's special duty as His priest-people.</q><note place='foot'>Sifre
to Deut. VI, 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Chapter_X_Section_8'/>
8. Likewise is the liturgical name <q>God of our fathers</q>
far from being a nationalistic limitation. On the contrary,
the rabbis single out Abraham as the missionary, the herald
of monotheism in its march to world-conquest. For his use
of the term, <q>the God of heaven and the God of the earth</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
XXIV, 3.</note>
they offer a characteristic explanation: <q>Before Abraham
came, the people worshiped only the God of heaven, but
Abraham by winning them for his God brought Him down
and made Him also the God of the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. R. XXIV, 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. Reverence for the Deity caused the Jew to avoid not
only the utterance of the holy Name itself, but even the common
use of its substitute <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Adonai</foreign>. Therefore still
other synonyms were introduced, such as <q>Master of the universe,</q>
<q>the Holy One, blessed be He,</q> <q>the Merciful One,</q> <q>the
Omnipotence</q>
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ha Geburah</foreign>),<note place='foot'>Shab.
87 a, 89 b; Mek. Yithro IV.</note> <q>King of the kings of kings</q>
(under Persian influence&mdash;as the Persian ruler called himself
the King of Kings);<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Alenu.</note>
and in Hasidean circles it became customary
to invoke God as <q>our Father</q> and <q>our Father
in heaven.</q><note place='foot'>See J. E., art. <hi rend='italic'>Abba</hi>
and Names of God; Weber, l. c, 148 f.; Bousset, II,
356-361; Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>, II, 21-28.</note>
The rather strange appellations for God,
<q>Heaven</q><note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Heaven; Levy, W. B.:
<q>Shamayim.</q></note> and (dwelling) <q>Place</q>
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ha Makom</foreign>) seem to
originate in certain formulas of the oath. In the latter
name the rabbis even found hints of God's omnipresence:
<q>As space&mdash;<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Makom</foreign>&mdash;encompasses
all things, so does God
encompass the world instead of being encompassed by it.</q><note place='foot'>See
Pes. X, 5; Ber. 16 b; Ab. Zar. 40 b; Gen. R. LXVIII, 9, referring
to Gen. XXVIII, 11 and Ex. XXXIII, 21; P. d. R. El. XXXV; Pes. Rab.
104 a; comp. LXX, Ex. XXIV, 10; see also Siegfried: <hi rend='italic'>Philo</hi>, p.
202, 204, 217; Schechter, l. c., 26, 34. The passage in Mekilta on Ex. XVII, 7, which
refers <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Makom</foreign> to the Sanhedrin (after Deut.
XVII, 8), seems originally to have been a marginal note belonging to Ex. XXI, 13, where
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Makom</foreign> is the equivalent
of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Makam</foreign>,
a place of refuge, and put here at the wrong place by an error;&mdash;Against
Schechter, l. c., 27 note 1, Bousset (p. 591) thinks that
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ha Makom</foreign>
for God is Persian, where both space and time were deified. See Spiegel:
<hi rend='italic'>Eranisches Alterthum</hi>, II, 15 f.</note>
</p>

<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>

<p>
10. The rabbis early read a theological meaning into the
two names JHVH and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign>, taking the former
as the divine attribute of <emph>mercy</emph> and the latter as that of
<emph>justice</emph>.<note place='foot'>See Gen. R. XII, 15; XXX, 3; Targum to
Psalm LVI, 11; comp. Philo,
I, 496; Siegfried, l. c., 203, 213.</note>
In general, however, the former name was explained etymologically
as signifying eternity, <q>He who is, who was, and
who shall be.</q> Philo shows familiarity with the two attributes
of justice and mercy, but he and other Alexandrian
writers explained JHVH and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ehyeh</foreign>
metaphysically, and accordingly called God, <q>the One who is,</q> that is, the Source
of all existence. Both conceptions still influence Jewish exegesis
and account for the term <q>the Eternal</q> sometimes
used for <q>the Lord.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI. The Existence of God</head>

<p>
1. For the religious consciousness, God is not to be demonstrated
by argument, but is a fact of inner and outer experience.
Whatever the origin and nature of the cosmos
may be according to natural science, the soul of man follows
its natural bent, as in the days of Abraham, to look through
nature to the Maker, Ordainer, and Ruler of all things, who
uses the manifold world of nature only as His workshop,
and who rules it in freedom as its sovereign Master. The
entire cosmic life points to a Supreme Being from whom
all existence must have arisen, and without whom life and
process would be impossible. Still even this mode of thought
is influenced and determined by the prevalent monotheistic
conceptions.
</p>

<p>
Far more original and potent in man is the feeling of limitation
and dependency. This brings him to bow down before
a higher Power, at first in fear and trembling, but later in
holy awe and reverence. As soon as man attains self-consciousness
and his will acquires purpose, he encounters a will
stronger than his own, with which he often comes into conflict,
and before which he must frequently yield. Thus he becomes
conscious of duty&mdash;of what he ought and ought not to do.
This is not, like earlier limitations, purely physical and
working from without; it is moral and operates from within.
It is the sense of duty, or, as we call it, <emph>conscience</emph>, the sense
of right and wrong. This awakened very early in the race,
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
and through it God's voice has been perceived ever since the
days of Adam and of Cain.<note place='foot'>Metaphysical proofs
for God's existence have been outlawed since Kant.
God is the postulate of man's moral consciousness. See Rauwenhoff, l. c., 236-357.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. According to Scripture, man in his natural state possesses
the certainty of God's existence through such inner
experience. Therefore the Bible contains no command to
<emph>believe</emph> in God, nor any logical demonstration of His existence.
Both the Creation stories and those of the beginnings of mankind
assume as undisputed the existence of God as the Creator
and Judge of the world. Arguments appealing to reason
were resorted to only in competition with idolatry, as in Deuteronomy,
Jeremiah, and Deutero-Isaiah, and subsequently
by the Haggadists in legends such as those about Abraham.
Nor does the Bible consider any who deny the existence of
God;<note place='foot'>See art. Atheism, in J. E. and in Enc. Reli.
and Ethics, II, 18 f.</note> only much later, in the Talmud, do we hear of those
who <q>deny the fundamental principle</q> of the faith. The
doubt expressed in Job, Koheleth, and certain of the Psalms,
concerns rather the justice of God than His existence. True,
Jeremiah and the Psalms<note place='foot'>Jer. V, 12; Psalm X, 4; XIV,
1; LIII, 1.</note> mention some who say <q>There is
no God,</q> but these are not atheists in our sense of the word;
they are the impious who deny the moral order of life by word
or deed. It is the villain (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Nabal</foreign>),
not the <q>fool</q> who <q>says in
heart, there is no God.</q> Even the Talmud does not mean
the real atheist when speaking of <q>the denier of the fundamental
principle,</q> but the man who says, <q>There is neither
a judgment nor a Judge above and beyond.</q><note place='foot'>B. B. 16 b;
Targ. to Gen. IV, 8.</note> In other words,
the <q>denier</q> is the same as the Epicurean (Apicoros), who
refuses to recognize the moral government of the world.<note place='foot'>See
above, Chapter <ref target='Chapter_IV_Section_3'>IV, 3</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. After the downfall of the nation and Temple, the situation
changed through the contemptuous question of the
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
nations, <q>Where is your God?</q> Then the necessity became
evident of proving that the Ruler of nations still held
dominion over the world, and that His wondrous powers
were shown more than ever before through the fact of Israel's
preservation in captivity. This is the substance of the addresses
of the great seer of the Exile in chapters XL to LIX
of Isaiah, in which he exposes the gods of heathendom to
everlasting scorn, more than any other prophet before or
afterward. He declares these deities to be vanity and naught,
but proclaims the Holy One of Israel as the Lord of the universe.
He hath <q>meted out the heavens with the span,</q> and
<q>weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance.</q>
Before Him <q>the nations are as a drop of the bucket,</q> and
<q>the inhabitants of the earth as grasshoppers.</q> <q>He bringeth
out the hosts of the stars by number, and calleth them all by
name,</q> <q>He hath assigned to the generations of men their
lot from the beginning, and knoweth at the beginning what
will be their end.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XL, 12-26; XLVI,
10.</note> Measured by such passages as these and
such as Psalms VIII, XXIV, XXXIII, CIV, and CXXXIX,
where God is felt as a living power, all philosophical arguments
about His existence seem to be strange fires on the altar
of religion. The believer can do without them, and the unbeliever
will hardly be convinced by them.
</p>

<p>
4. Upon the contact of the Jew with Greek philosophy
doubt arose in many minds, and belief entered into conflict
with reason. But even then, the defense of the faith was
still carried on by reasoning along the lines of common sense.<note place='foot'>See
Bousset, l. c., 295-298.</note>
Thus the regularity of the sun, moon, and stars,&mdash;all worshiped
by the pagans as deities&mdash;was considered a proof of
God's omnipotence and rule of the universe, a proof which
the legend ascribes to Abraham in his controversy with
Nimrod.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Abraham.</note>
In like manner, the apocryphal Book of Wisdom<note place='foot'>Ch. XIII.</note>
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
says that true wisdom, as opposed to the folly of heathenism,
is <q>to reason from the visible to the Invisible One, and from
the cosmos, the great work of art, to the Supreme Artificer.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. Philo was the first who tried to refute the <q>atheistic</q>
views of materialists and pantheists by adducing proofs of
God's existence from nature and the human intellect. In
the former he pointed out order as evidence of the wisdom
underlying the cosmos, and in the latter the power of self-determination
as shadowing forth a universal mind which
determines the entire universe.<note place='foot'>Philo: De Somniis, I, 43, 44;
Zeller: <hi rend='italic'>D. Philosophie d. Griechen</hi>, III,
2, 307 f.; Drummond: <hi rend='italic'>Philo Judæus</hi>, II, 4-5.</note>
Still, with his mystical
attitude, Philo realized that the chief knowledge of God is
through intuition, by the inner experience of the soul.
</p>

<p>
6. Two proofs taken from nature owe their origin to
Greek philosophy. Anaxagoras and Socrates, from their
theory of design in nature, deduced that there is a universal
intelligence working for higher aims and purposes. This so-called
<emph>teleological</emph> proof, as worked out in detail by Plato,
was the unfailing reliance of subsequent philosophers and
theologians.<note place='foot'>See D. F. Strauss: <hi rend='italic'>Christl.
Glaubenslehre</hi>, I, 364-399; Windelband: <hi rend='italic'>Hist.
of Phil.</hi>, transl. by J. H. Tufts, 2d ed., 1914, p. 54, 98, 128, 327.</note>
Plato and Aristotle, moreover, from the
continuous motion of all matter, inferred a prime cause, an
unmoved mover. This is the so-called <emph>cosmological</emph> proof,
used by different schools in varying forms.<note place='foot'>See
Windelband-Tufts, l. c., 145, 292.</note> It occupies the
foremost place in the systems of the Arabic Aristotelians,
and consequently is dominant among the Jewish philosophers,
the Christian scholastics, and in the modern philosophic
schools down to Kant. It is based upon the old principle
of causality, and therefore takes the mutability and relativity
of all beings in the cosmos as evidence of a Being that is
immutable, unconditioned, and absolutely necessary, causa
sui, the prime cause of all existence.
</p>

<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>

<p>
7. The Mohammedan theologians added a new element to
the discussion. In their endeavor to prove that the world
is the work of a Creator, they pointed as evidence to the
multiformity and composite structure, the contingency and
dependency of the cosmos; thus they concluded that it must
have been created, and that its Creator must necessarily be
the one, absolute, and all-determining cause. This proof is
used also by Saadia and Bahya ben Joseph.<note place='foot'>See Strauss,
l. c.; Kaufmann, l. c., 2-3, 58; <hi rend='italic'>D. Theologie d. Bachya</hi>, p.
222 f.; Husik: <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Jew. Phil.</hi>, p. 32 ff., 89 ff.</note>
Its weakness,
however, was exposed by Ibn Sina and Alfarabi among the
Mohammedans, and later by Abraham ibn Daud and Maimonides,
their Jewish successors as Aristotelians. These
proposed a substitute argument. From the fact that the
existence of all cosmic beings is merely possible,&mdash;that is,
they may exist and they may not exist,&mdash;these thinkers concluded
that an absolutely necessary being must exist as the
cause and condition of all things, and this absolutely unconditioned
yet all-conditioning being is God, the One who
<emph>is</emph>.<note place='foot'>Kaufmann, l. c., p. 341 f., 431 f.;
Husik, l. c., 218 f., 254 f.</note> Of course, the God so deduced and inferred is a mere
abstraction, incapable of satisfying the emotional craving of
the heart.
</p>

<p>
8. While the cosmological proof proceeds from the transitory
and imperfect nature of the world, the <emph>ontological</emph> proof,
first proposed by Anselm of Canterbury, the Christian scholastic
of the XI century, and further elaborated by Descartes
and Mendelssohn, proceeds from the human intellect. The
mind conceives the idea of God as an absolutely perfect being,
and, as there can be no perfection without existence, the conclusion
is that this idea must necessarily be objectively true.
Then, as the idea of God is innate in man, God must necessarily
exist,&mdash;and for proof of this they point to the Scriptural
verse, <q>The fool hath said in his heart, there is no God,</q>
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
and other similar passages. In its improved form, this argument
uses the human concept of an infinitely perfect God
as evidence, or, at least, as postulate that such a Being exists
beyond the finite world of man.<note place='foot'>See D. F. Strauss,
l. c.; Windelband-Tufts, p. 292, 393.</note>
</p>

<p>
Another argument, rather naïve in character, which was
favored by the Stoics and adopted by the Church fathers, is
called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de consensu gentium</foreign>,
and endeavored to prove the reality
of God's existence from the universality of His worship.
It speaks well for the sound reasoning of the Jewish thinkers
that they refused to follow the lead of the Mohammedans in
this respect, and did not avail themselves of an argument
which can be used just as easily in support of a plurality
of gods.<note place='foot'>D. F. Strauss, l. c., 375, 394;
Windelband-Tufts, l. c., 450.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. All these so-called proofs were invalidated by Immanuel
Kant, the great philosopher of Königsberg, whose critical inquiry
into the human intellect showed that the entire sum of
our knowledge of objects and also of the formulation of our
ideas is based upon our limited mode of apperception, while
the reality or essence, <q>the thing in itself,</q> will ever remain
beyond our ken. If this is true of physical objects, it is all
the more true of God, whom we know through our minds
alone and not at all through our five senses. Accordingly,
he shows that all the metaphysical arguments have no basis,
and that we can know God's existence only through <emph>ethics</emph>,
as a postulate of our moral nature. The inner consciousness
of our moral obligation, or duty, implies a moral order of life,
or moral law; and this, in turn, postulates the existence of
God, the Ruler of life, who assigns to each of us his task and
his destiny.<note place='foot'>See Windelband-Tufts, l. c., 549-550.</note>
</p>

<p>
10. It is true that God is felt and worshiped first as the
supreme power in the world, before man perceives Him as
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
the highest ideal of morality. Therefore man will never
cease looking about him for vestiges of divinity and for proofs
of his intuitive knowledge of God. The wondrous order,
harmony, and signs of design in nature, as well as the impulse
of the reason to search for the unity of all things, corroborate
this innate belief in God. Still more do the consciousness
of duty in the individual&mdash;conscience&mdash;and the progress of
history with its repeated vindication of right and defeat of
wrong proclaim to the believer unmistakably that the God
of justice reigns. But no proof, however convincing, will
ever bring back to the skeptic or unbeliever the God he has
lost, unless his pangs of anguish or the void within fill his
desolate world anew with the vivifying thought of a living God.
</p>

<p>
11. Among all the Jewish religious philosophers the highest
rank must be accorded to Jehudah ha Levi, the author of
the <hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>,<note place='foot'>See Kaufmann, l. c.,
p. 223 f., and, opposed to him, Neumark: <hi rend='italic'>Jehuda
Halevi's Philosophy</hi>, Cincinnati, 1909. See also Husik, l. c., 157
ff.</note> who makes the historical fact of the divine revelation
the foundation of the Jewish religion and the chief testimony
of the existence of God. As a matter of fact, reason
alone will not lead to God, except where religious intuition
forms, so to speak, the ladder of heaven, leading to the realm
of the unknowable. Philosophy, at best, can only demonstrate
the existence of a final Cause, or of a supreme Intelligence
working toward sublime purposes; possibly also a moral
government of the world, in both the physical and the spiritual
life. Religion alone, founded upon divine revelation, can
teach man to find a God, to whom he can appeal in trust in
his moments of trouble or of woe, and whose will he can see in
the dictates of conscience and the destiny of nations. Reason
must serve as a <emph>corrective</emph> for the contents of revelation,
scrutinizing and purifying, deepening and spiritualizing ever
anew the truths received through intuition, but it can never
be the final source of truth.
</p>

<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>

<p>
12. The same method must apply also to modern thought
and research, which substituted historical methods for metaphysics
in both the physical and intellectual world, and which
endeavors to trace the origin and growth of both objects and
ideas in accordance with fixed laws. The process of evolution,
our modern key with which to unlock the secrets of
nature, points most significantly to a Supreme Power and
Energy. But this energy, entering into the cosmic process at
its outset, causing its motion and its growth, implies also an
end, and thus again we have the Supreme Intelligence reached
through a new type of teleology.<note place='foot'>Compare C. Seligman:
<hi rend='italic'>Judenth. u. moderne Anschauung</hi>. The philosophy
of Bergson, which eliminates design and purpose from the cosmos and places
Deity itself into the process as the vital urgent of it all, and thus sees God forever
in the making, is pantheistic and un-Jewish, and therefore cannot be considered
in a theology of Judaism. This does not exclude our accepting minor elements
of his system, which contains suggestive hints. H. G. Wells' <hi rend='italic'>God
the Invisible King</hi> (Macmillan, 1917) is likewise a God in the making,
<emph>man-made</emph>, not the Maker and Ruler of man.</note> But all these conceptions,
however they may be in harmony with the Jewish belief in
creation and revelation, can at best supplement it, but can
certainly neither supplant nor be identified with it.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XII. The Essence of God</head>

<p>
1. An exquisite Oriental fable tells of a sage who had been
meditating vainly for days and weeks on the question, What
is God? One day, walking along the seashore, he saw some
children busying themselves by digging holes in the sand and
pouring into them water from the sea. <q>What are you doing
there?</q> he asked them, to which they replied, <q>We want to
empty the sea of its water.</q> <q>Oh, you little fools,</q> he exclaimed
with a smile, but suddenly his smile vanished in serious
thought. <q>Am I not as foolish as these children?</q> he said
to himself. <q>How can I with my small brain hope to grasp the
infinite nature of God?</q>
</p>

<p>
All efforts of philosophy to define the essence of God are
futile. <q>Canst thou by searching find out God?</q> Zophar
asks of his friend Job.<note place='foot'>Job XI, 7.</note>
Both Philo and Maimonides maintain
that we can know of God only that He <emph>is</emph>; we can never
fathom His innermost being or know what He is. Both find
this unknowability of God expressed in the words spoken to
Moses: <q>If I withdraw My hand, thou shall see My back&mdash;that
is, the effects of God's power and wisdom&mdash;but My
face&mdash;the real essence of God&mdash;thou shalt not see.</q><note place='foot'>Ex.
XXXIII, 23; Maim.; <hi rend='italic'>Yesode ha Torah</hi>, I, 8, 10;
<hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>, I, 21 a; Kaufmann,
l. c., 431; Philo: Mutatio Nom., 2; Vita Mosis, I, 28; Leg. All., I, 29,
and elsewhere. See J. Drummond: <hi rend='italic'>Philo Judæus</hi>, II, 18-24.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. Still, a divinity void of all essential qualities fails to
satisfy the religious soul. Man demands to know what God
is&mdash;at least, what God is to him. In the first word of the
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
Decalogue God speaks through His people Israel to the religious
consciousness of all men at all times, beginning, <q>I am
the Lord, <emph>thy</emph> God.</q> This word <emph>I</emph> lifts God at once above
all beings and powers of the cosmos, in fact, above all other
existence, for it expresses His unique self-consciousness. This
attribute above all is possessed by no being in the world of
nature, and only by man, who is the image of his Maker.
According to the Midrash, all creation was hushed when the
Lord spoke on Sinai, <q><emph>I</emph> am the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Ex.
R. XXIX, at the close.</note> God is not merely
the supreme Being, but also the supreme Self-consciousness.
As man, in spite of all his limitations and helplessness, still
towers high above all his fellow creatures by virtue of his free
will and self-conscious action, so God, who knows no bounds
to His wisdom and power, surpasses all beings and forces of
the universe, for He rules over all as the one completely self-conscious
Mind and Will. In both the visible and invisible
realms He manifests Himself as the absolutely free Personality,
moral and spiritual, who allots to every thing its existence,
form, and purpose. For this reason Scripture calls Him
<q>the living God and everlasting King.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. X, 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. Judaism, accordingly, teaches us to recognize God,
above all, as revealing Himself in self-conscious activity, as
determining all that happens by His absolutely free will, and
thus as showing man how to walk as a free moral agent. In
relation to the world, His work or workshop, He is the self-conscious
Master, saying <q>I am that which I am</q>; in relation
to man, who is akin to Him as a self-conscious rational
and moral being, He is the living Fountain of all that knowledge
and spirituality for which men long, and in which alone
they may find contentment and bliss.
</p>

<p>
Thus the God of Judaism, the world's great <emph>I Am</emph>, forms a
complete contrast, not only to the lifeless powers of nature
and destiny, which were worshiped by the ancient pagans,
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
but also to the God of modern paganism, a God divested of all
personality and self-consciousness, such as He is conceived
of by the new school of Christian theology, with its pantheistic
tendency. I refer to the school of Ritschl, which strives to
render the myth of the man-god philosophically intelligible by
teaching that God reaches self-consciousness only in the perfect
type of man, that is, Christ, while otherwise He is entirely
immanent, one with the world. All the more forcibly does
Jewish monotheism insist upon its doctrine that God, in His
continual self-revelation, is the supermundane and self-conscious
Ruler of both nature and history. <q>I am the Lord,
that is My name, and My glory will I not give to another,</q>&mdash;so
says the God of Judaism.<note place='foot'>Isaiah XLIV, 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. The Jewish God-idea, of course, had to go through many
stages of development before it reached the concept of a
transcendental and spiritual god. It was necessary first that
the Decalogue and the Book of the Covenant prohibit most
stringently polytheism and every form of idolatry, and second
that a strictly imageless worship impress the people with the
idea that Israel's God was both invisible and incorporeal.<note place='foot'>Comp.
Dillmann, l. c., 226-235; D. F. Strauss, l. c., I, 525-553.</note>
Yet a wide step still intervened from that stage to the complete
recognition of God as a purely spiritual Being, lacking all
qualities perceptible to the senses, and not resembling man
in either his inner or his outer nature. Centuries of gradual
ripening of thought were still necessary for the growth of this
conception. This was rendered still more difficult by the
Scriptural references to God in His actions and His revelations,
and even in His motives, after a human pattern. Israel's
sages required centuries of effort to remove all anthropomorphic
and anthropopathic notions of God, and thus to
elevate Him to the highest realm of spirituality.<note place='foot'>See J. E.,
art. Anthropomorphism and Anthropopathism. Comp.
Schmiedl, l. c., 1-30.</note>
</p>

<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Chapter_XII_Section_5'/>
5. In this process of development two points of view demand
consideration. We must not overlook the fact that the
perfectly clear distinction which we make between the sensory
and the spiritual does not appeal to the child-like mind,
which sees it rather as external. What we call transcendent,
owing to our comprehension of the immeasurable universe,
was formerly conceived only as far remote in space or time.
Thus God is spoken of in Scripture as dwelling in heaven and
looking down upon the inhabitants of the earth to judge them
and to guide them.<note place='foot'>Ps. XXXIII, 13-14.</note>
According to Deuteronomy, God spoke
from heaven to the people about Mt. Sinai, while Exodus
represents Him as coming down to the mountain from His
heavenly heights to proclaim the law amid thunder and
lightning.<note place='foot'>Deut. IV, 36; Ex. XIX, 20. Comp.
Gen. XI, 5.</note> The Babylonian conception of heaven prevailed
throughout the Middle Ages and influenced both the mystic
lore about the heavenly throne and the philosophic cosmology
of the Aristotelians, such as Maimonides. Yet Scripture
offers also another view, the concept of God as the One enthroned
on high, whom <q>the heavens and the heaven's heavens
cannot encompass.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XLVI, 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
The fact is that language still lacked an expression for pure
spirit, and the intellect freed itself only gradually from the
restrictions of primitive language to attain a purer conception
of the divine. Thus we attain deeper insight into the spiritual
nature of God when we read the inimitable words of the
Psalmist describing His omnipresence,<note place='foot'>Ps. CXXXIX,
7-10.</note> or that other passage:
<q>He that planted the ear, shall He not hear? He that formed
the eye, shall He not see? He that chastiseth the nations,
shall He not correct, even He that teaches man knowledge?</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
XCIV, 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
The translators and interpreters of the Bible felt the need
of eliminating everything of a sensory nature from God and
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
of avoiding anthropomorphism, through the influence of
Greek philosophy. This spiritualization of the God idea was
taken up again by the philosophers of the Spanish-Arabic
period, who combated the prevailing mysticism. Through
them Jewish monotheism emphasized its opposition to every
human representation of God, especially the God-Man of the
Christian Church.
</p>

<p>
6. On the other hand, we must bear in mind that we
naturally ascribe to God a human personality, whether we
speak of Him as the Master-worker of the universe, as the all-seeing
and all-hearing Judge, or the compassionate and merciful
Father. We cannot help attributing human qualities and
emotions to Him the moment we invest Him with a moral
and spiritual nature. When we speak of His punitive justice,
His unfailing mercy, or His all-wise providence, we transfer
to Him, imperceptibly, our own righteous indignation at the
sight of a wicked deed, or our own compassion with the
sufferer, or even our own mode of deliberation and decision.
Moreover, the prophets and the Torah, in order to make God
plain to the people, described Him in vivid images of human
life, with anger and jealousy as well as compassion and repentance,
and also with the organs and functions of the
senses,&mdash;seeing, hearing, smelling, speaking, and walking.
</p>

<p>
7. The rabbis are all the more emphatic in their assertions
that the Torah merely intends to assist the simple-minded,
and that unseemly expressions concerning Deity are due to
the inadequacy of language, and must not be taken literally.<note place='foot'>See
Ab. d. R. Nathan II; Bacher: <hi rend='italic'>D. Exegetische Terminologie</hi>, I, 8;
Schechter, l. c., 35.</note>
<q>It is an act of boldness allowed only to the prophets to measure
the Creator by the standard of the creature,</q> says the
Haggadist, and again, <q>God appeared to Israel, now as a
heroic warrior, now as a venerable sage imparting knowledge,
and again as a kind dispenser of bounties, but always in a
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
manner befitting the time and circumstance, so as to satisfy
the need of the human heart.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. R. XXVII; Mek.
Ex. XV; Pes. d. R. K. 109 b; Tanh. to Ex. XXII,
16; Schechter, l. c., 43 f.</note> This is strikingly illustrated
in the following dialogue: <q>A heretic came to Rabbi Meir
asking, <q>How can you reconcile the passage which reads,
<q>Do I not fill heaven and earth, says the Lord,</q> with the one
which relates that the Lord appeared to Moses between the
cherubim of the ark of the covenant?</q> Whereupon Rabbi
Meir took two mirrors, one large and the other small, and
placed them before the interrogator. <q>Look into this glass,</q>
he said, <q>and into that. Does not your figure seem different
in one than in the other? How much more will the majesty
of God, who has neither figure nor form, be reflected differently
in the minds of men! To one it will appear according to his
narrow view of life, and to the other in accordance with his
larger mental horizon.</q></q><note place='foot'>Gen. R. IV, 3;
comp, Pes. d. R. K. 2 b; Schechter, l. c., 29 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
In like manner Rabbi Joshua ben Hanania, when asked
sarcastically by the Emperor Hadrian to show him his God,
replied: <q>Come and look at the sun which now shines in the
full splendor of noonday! Behold, thou art dazzled. How,
then, canst thou see without bewilderment the majesty of
Him from whom emanates both sun and stars?</q><note place='foot'>Hul.
59, 60; Sanh. 39 a; Philo: De Abrahamo, 16.</note> This rejoinder,
which was familiar to the Greeks also, is excelled by
the one of Rabban Gamaliel II to a heathen who asked him
<q>Where does the God dwell to whom you daily pray?</q>
<q>Tell me first,</q> he answered, <q>where does your soul dwell,
which is so close to thee? Thou canst not tell. How, then,
can I inform thee concerning Him who dwells in heaven, and
whose throne is separated from the earth by a journey of
3500 years?</q> <q>Then do we not do better to pray to gods
who are near at hand, and whom we can see with our eyes?</q>
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
continued the heathen, whereupon the sage struck home,
<q>Well, you may see your gods, but they neither see nor help
you, while our God, Himself unseen, yet sees and protects us
constantly.</q><note place='foot'>Mid. Teh. Ps. CIII, 1; Sanh. 39 a.</note>
The comparison of the invisible soul to God,
the invisible spirit of the universe, is worked out further in
the Midrash to Psalm CIII.
</p>

<p>
8. From the foregoing it is clear that, while Judaism insists
on the Deity's transcending all finite and sensory limitations,
it never lost the sense of the close relationship between
man and his Maker. Notwithstanding Christian theologians
to the contrary, the Jewish God was never a mere abstraction.<note place='foot'>See
Weber, l. c., 149 f., 157; Bousset, l. c., 302, 313; von Hartman: <hi rend='italic'>Das
religioese Bewusstsein</hi>. Against this Schreiner, l. c., 49-58, and Schechter,
<hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi> 33 f.</note>
The words, <q>I am the Lord thy God,</q> betoken the intimate
relation between the redeemed and the heavenly Redeemer,
and the song of triumph at the Red Sea, <q>This is my God, I
will extol Him,</q> testifies&mdash;according to the Midrash&mdash;that
even the humblest of God's chosen people were filled with
the feeling of His nearness.<note place='foot'>Mek. and Tanh. to Ex.
XV, 11.</note> In the same way the warm
breath of union with God breathes through all the writings,
the prayers, and the whole history of Judaism. <q>For what
great nation is there that hath God so nigh unto them as the
Lord our God is, whenever we call upon Him?</q> exclaims
Moses in Deuteronomy, and the rabbis, commenting
upon the plural form used here, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Kerobim</foreign>,
= <q>nigh,</q> remark: <q>God is nigh to everyone in accordance with his special
needs.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. IV, 7; Yer. Ber. IX, 13 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. Probably the rabbis were at their most profound mood
in their saying, <q>God's greatness lies in His condescension,
as may be learned from the Torah, the Prophets, and the Writings.
To quote only Isaiah also: <q>Thus saith the High and
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
Lofty One, I dwell in high and holy places, with him that is
of a contrite and humble spirit.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. LVII, 15. See also
Deut. X, 17-18; Ps. LXXXVI, 5-6. Comp. R. Johanan, Meg, 31 a.</note>
For this reason God selected
as the place of His revelation the humble Sinai and the lowly
thornbush.</q><note place='foot'>Ex. R. II, 9; Mid. Teh. Ps. LXVIII, 7.</note>
In fact, the absence of any mediator in
Judaism necessitates the doctrine that God&mdash;with all His
transcendent majesty&mdash;is at the same time <q>an ever present
helper in trouble,</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XLVI, 2.</note>
and that His omnipotence includes care
for the greatest and the smallest beings of creation.<note place='foot'>Ab. Zar. 3
b.</note>
</p>

<p>
10. The doctrine that God is above and beyond the universe,
transcending all created things, as well as time and
space, might lead logically to the view of the deist that He
stands outside of the world, and does not work from within.
But this inference has never been made even by the boldest
of Jewish thinkers. The Psalmist said, <q>Who is like the Lord
our God, that hath His seat on high, that humbleth Himself
to behold what is in heaven and on earth?</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
CXIII, 5, 6.</note>&mdash;words which
express the deepest and the loftiest thought of Judaism.
Beside the all-encompassing Deity no other divine power or
personality can find a place. God is in all; He is over all;
He is both immanent and transcendent. His creation was
not merely setting into motion the wheels of the cosmic fabric,
after which He withdrew from the world. The Jew praises
Him for every scent and sight of nature or of human life, for
the beauty of the sea and the rainbow, for every flash of lightning
that illumines the darkened clouds and every peal of
thunder that shakes the earth. On every such occasion the
Jew utters praise to <q>Him who daily renews the work of
creation,</q> or <q>Him who in everlasting faithfulness keepeth
His covenant with mankind.</q> Such is the teaching of the
men of the Great Synagogue,<note place='foot'>Ber. 60 b.
Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerbook</hi>, 291.</note> and the charge of the Jewish
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
God idea being a barren and abstract transcendentalism can
be urged only by the blindness of bigotry.<note place='foot'>On pantheism
in Judaism see Seligman, l. c.</note>
</p>

<p>
11. The interweaving of the ideas of God's immanence and
transcendency is shown especially in two poems embodied in
the songs of the Synagogue, Ibn Gabirol's <q>Crown of Royalty</q>
and the <q>Songs of Unity</q> for each day of the week, composed
by Samuel ben Kalonymos, the father of Judah the Pious of
Regensburg. Here occur such sentences as these: <q>All is in
God and God is in all</q>; <q>Sufficient unto Himself and self-determining,
He is the ever-living and self-conscious Mind,
the all-permeating, all-impelling, and all-accomplishing Will</q>;
<q>The universe is the emanation of the plenitude of God, each
part the light of His infinite light, flame of His eternal empyrean</q>;
<q>The universe is the garment, the covering of God,
and He the all-penetrating Soul.</q><note place='foot'>See Sachs:
<hi rend='italic'>D. religioese Poesie d. Juden. in Spanien</hi>, 225-228; Kaufmann:
<hi rend='italic'>Stud u. Solomon Ibn Gabirol.</hi></note> All these ideas were
borrowed from neo-Platonism, and found a conspicuous place
in Ibn Gabirol's philosophy, later influencing the Cabbalah.
</p>

<p>
Similarly the appellation, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Makom</foreign>,
<q>Space,</q> is explained by
both Philo and the rabbis as denoting <q>Him who encompasses
the world, but whom the world cannot encompass.</q><note place='foot'>See Siegfried:
<hi rend='italic'>Philo</hi>, 199-203, 292; Gen. R. LXVIII, 10; comp. Geiger:
Zeitschr., XI, 218; Hamburger: R. W. B., II, 986.</note> An
utterance such as this, well-nigh pantheistic in tone, leads
directly to theories like those of Spinoza or of David Nieto,
the well-known London Rabbi, who was largely under Spinozistic
influence<note place='foot'>See Graetz: G. d. J., X, 319.</note>
and who still was in accord with Jewish
thought. Certainly, as long as Jewish monotheism conceives
of God as self-conscious Intellect and freely acting Will, it
can easily accept the principle of divine immanence.
</p>

<p>
12. We accept, then, the fact that man, child-like, invests
God with human qualities,&mdash;a view advanced by Abraham
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
ben David of Posquieres in opposition to Maimonides.<note place='foot'>See Maimonides:
<hi rend='italic'>H. Teshubah</hi>, III, 7 and R. A. B. D., notes.</note>
Still, the thinkers of Judaism have ever labored to divest the
Deity of every vestige of sensuousness, of likeness to man, in
fact, of every limitation to action or to free will. Every conception
which merges God into the world or identifies Him
with it and thus makes Him subject to necessity, is incompatible
with the Jewish idea of God, which enthrones Him
above the universe as its free and sovereign Master. <q>Am I
a God near at hand, saith the Lord, and not a God afar off?
Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him?
saith the Lord. Do I not fill heaven and earth?</q><note place='foot'>Jer.
XXIII, 23.</note> <q>To
whom will you liken Me, that I should be equal?</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XL, 25.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIII. The One and Only God</head>

<p>
1. From the very beginning no Jewish doctrine was so
firmly proclaimed and so heroically defended as the belief in
the One and Only God. This constitutes the essence and
foundation of Judaism. However slowly the people learned
that there could be no gods beside the One God, and that
consequently all the pagan deities were but <q>naught and
vanity,</q> the Judaism of the Torah starts with the proclamation
of the Only One, and later Judaism marches through the
nations and ages of history with a never-silent protest against
polytheism of every kind, against every division of the Godhead
into parts, powers, or persons.
</p>

<p>
2. It is perfectly clear that divine pedagogy could not well
have demanded of a people immature and untrained in religion,
like Israel in the wilderness period, the immediate
belief in the only one God and in none else. Such a belief is
the result of a long mental process; it is attained only after
centuries of severe struggle and crisis. Instead of this, the
Decalogue of Sinai demanded of the people that they worship
only the God of the Covenant who had delivered them from
Egypt to render them His people.<note place='foot'>Lev. XIX, 4;
XXVI, 1; Isaiah II, 8, 11; Psalm XCVI, 5.</note> But, as they yielded more
and more to the seductive worship of the gods of the Canaanites
and their other neighbors, the law became more rigid in prohibiting
such idolatrous practices, and the prophets poured
forth their unscathing wrath against the <q>stiff-necked people</q>
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
and endeavored by unceasing warnings and threats to win
them for the pure truth of monotheism.<note place='foot'>Comp. Ex. XX, 3;
XXII, 19; XXIII, 13; with Deut. VI, 4; IV, 35, 39;
XXXII, 39; Isaiah XL to XLVIII.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. The God of Sinai proclaims Himself in the Decalogue
as a <q>jealous God,</q> and not in vain. He cannot tolerate
other gods beside Himself. Truth can make no concession
to untruth, nor enter into any compromise with it without
self-surrender. A pagan religion could well afford to admit
foreign gods into its pantheon without offending the ruling
deities of the land. On the contrary, their realm seemed
rather to be enlarged by the addition. It was also easy to
blend the cults of deities originally distinct and unite many
divinities under a composite name, and by this process create
a system of worship which would either comprise the gods of
many lands or even merge them into one large family. This
was actually the state of the various pagan religions at the
time of the decline of antiquity. But such a procedure could
never lead towards true monotheism. It lacks the conception
of an inner unity, without which its followers could not
grasp the true idea of God as the source and essence of all
life, both physical and spiritual. Only the One God of revelation
made the world really one. In Him alone heaven and
earth, day and night, growth and decay, the weal and woe of
individuals and nations, appear as the work of an all-ruling
Power and Wisdom, so that all events in nature and history
are seen as parts of one all-comprising plan.<note place='foot'>See Dillmann, l. c.,
235-241; D. F. Strauss, l. c., 402-408; A. B. Davidson:
<hi rend='italic'>Theology of O. T.</hi>, p. 105; 149 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. It is perfectly true that a wide difference of view exists
between the prohibition of polytheism and idolatry in the
Decalogue and the proclamation in Deuteronomy of the unity
of God, and, still more, between the law of the Pentateuch
and the prophetic announcement of the day when Israel's
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
God <q>shall be King of the whole earth, and His name shall
be One.</q><note place='foot'>Zach. XIV, 9.</note>
Yet Judaism is based precisely upon this higher
view. The very first pages of Genesis, the opening of the
Torah, as well as the exilic portions of Isaiah which form the
culmination of the prophets, and the Psalms also, prove sufficiently
that at their time monotheism was an axiom of Judaism.
In fact, heathenism had become synonymous with
both image-worship and belief in many gods beside the Only
One of Israel, and accordingly had lost all hold upon the Jewish
people. The heathen gods were given a place in the celestial
economy, but only as subordinate rulers or as the guardian
angels of the nations, and always under the dominion of God
on high.<note place='foot'>Deut. IV, 19; Jer. X, 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. Later, in the contest against Græco-Egyptian paganism,
the doctrine of God's unity was emphasized in the Alexandrian
propaganda literature, of which only a portion has been preserved
for us. Here antagonism in the most forcible form is
expressed against the delusive cults of paganism, and exclusive
worship claimed for <q>the unseen, yet all-seeing God, the
uncreated Creator of the world.</q><note place='foot'>Bousset, l. c.,
221 f., 348.</note> The Rabbinical Haggadah
contains but dim reminiscences of the extensive propaganda
carried on previous to Hillel, the Talmudic type of the propagandist.
Moreover, this period fostered free inquiry and
philosophical discussion, and therefore the doctrine of unity
emerged more and more from simple belief to become a matter
of reason. The God of truth put to flight the gods of falsehood.
Hence many gentiles espoused the cause of Judaism,
becoming <q>God-fearing men.</q><note place='foot'>See Chapter
<ref target='Chapter_LVI'>LVI</ref>, below.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. In this connection it seems necessary to point out the
difference between the God of the Greek philosophers&mdash;Xenophanes
and Anaxagoras, Plato and Aristotle&mdash;and the
God of the Bible. In abandoning their own gods, the Greek
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
philosophers reached a deistic view of the cosmos. As their
study of science showed them plan and order everywhere,
they concluded that the universe is governed by an all-encompassing
Intelligence, a divine power entirely distinct from
the capricious deities of the popular religion. Reflection led
them to a complete rupture with their religious belief. The
Biblical belief in God underwent a different process. After
God had once been conceived of, He was held up as the ideal
of morality, including both righteousness and holiness. Then
this doctrine was continuously elucidated and deepened, until
a stage was reached where a harmony could be established
between the teachings of Moses and the wisdom of Plato and
Aristotle. To the noble thinkers of Hellas truth was an object
of supreme delight, the highest privilege of the sage. To the
adherents of Judaism truth became the holiest aim of life for
the entire people, for which all were taught to battle and to
die, as did the Maccabean heroes and Daniel and his associates,
their prototypes.
</p>

<p>
7. A deeper meaning was attached to the doctrine of God's
unity under Persian rule, in contact with the religious system
of Zoroaster. To the Persians life was a continual conflict
between the principles of good and of evil, until the ultimate
victory of good shall come. This dualistic view of the world
greatly excels all other heathen religious systems, insofar as it
assigns ethical purpose to the whole of life. Yet the great
seer of the Exile opposes this system in the name of the God
of Judaism, speaking to Cyrus, the king of Persia; <q>I am the
Lord and there is none else; beside Me there is no God. I
will gird thee, though thou dost not know Me, in order that
the people shall know from the rising of the sun and from
the west that there is none beside Me. I form the light and
create darkness; I make peace and also create evil, I am the
Lord that doeth these things.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XLV,
5-7.</note> This declaration of pure
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
monotheism is incompatible with dualism in both the physical
and the moral world; it regards evil as being mere
semblance without reality, an opposing force which can be
overcome and rendered a source of new strength for the victory
of the good. <q>Out of the mouth of the Most High
cometh there not the evil and the good?</q><note place='foot'>Lam. III, 38.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. The division of the world into rival realms of good and
evil powers, of angelic and demoniacal forces, which originated
in ancient Chaldea and underlies the Zoroastrian dualism,
finally took hold of Judaism also. Still this was not carried
to such an extent that Satan, the supreme ruler of the demon
world, was given a dominion equal to that of God, or interfering
with it, so as to impair thereby the principle of monotheism,
as was done by the Church later on. As a matter
of fact, at the time of nascent Christianity the leaders of the
Synagogue took rigid measures against those heretics
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Minim</foreign>)
who believed in two divine powers,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Shethe
Reshuyoth</hi>, see Hag. 15 a; Deut. R. I. 10; Eccl. R. II, 12; Weber,
l. c., 152; Joel, <hi rend='italic'>Blicke in d. Religionsgesch.</hi>,
II, 157.</note> because they recognized
the grave danger of moral degeneracy in this Gnostic dualism.
In the Church it led first to the deification of Christ (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the
Messiah) as the vanquisher of Satan; afterwards, owing to a
compromise with heathenism, the Trinity was adopted to
correspond with the three-fold godhead,&mdash;father, mother,
and son,&mdash;the place of the mother deity being taken by the
Holy Ghost, which was originally conceived as a female power
(the Syrian <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ruha</foreign> being
of the feminine gender).<note place='foot'>D. F. Strauss,
l. c., 409-501; J. E., art. Christianity.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. The churchmen have attempted often enough to harmonize
the dualism or trinitarianism of Christianity with the
monotheism of the Bible. Still Judaism persists in considering
such an infringement upon the belief in Israel's one and
only God as really a compromise with heathenism. <q>A
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
Jew is he who opposes every sort of polytheism,</q> says the
Talmud.<note place='foot'>Meg. 13 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
10. The medieval Jewish thinkers therefore made redoubled
efforts to express with utmost clearness the doctrine
of God's unity. In this effort they received special encouragement
from the example of the leaders of Islam, whose victorious
march over the globe was a triumph for the one God
of Abraham over the triune God of Christianity. A great
tide of intellectual progress arose, lending to the faith of the
Mohammedans and subsequently also to that of the Jews an
impetus which lasted for centuries. The new thought and keen
research of that period had a lasting influence upon the whole
development of western culture. An alliance was effected
between religion and philosophy, particularly by the leading
Jewish minds, which proved a liberating and stimulating force
in all fields of scientific investigation. Thus the pure idea
of monotheism became the basis for modern science and the
entire modern world-view.<note place='foot'>Comp. Lange:
<hi rend='italic'>Gesch. d. Materialismus</hi>, I, 149-158.</note>
</p>

<p>
11. The Mohammedan thinkers devoted their attention
chiefly to elucidating and spiritualizing the God idea, beginning
as early as the third century of Islamism, so to interpret
the Koran as to divest God of all anthropomorphic attributes
and to stress His absolute unity, uniqueness, and the incomparability
of His oneness. Soon they became familiar with
neo-Platonic and afterward with Aristotelian modes of speculation
through the work of Syrian and Jewish translators.
With the help of these they built up a system of theology
which influenced Jewish thought also, first in Karaite and then
in Rabbanite circles.<note place='foot'>Alfred v. Kremer, l. c.,
9-33; J. E., art. Arabic and Arabic-Jewish Philosophy.</note>
Thus sprang up successively the philosophical
systems of Saadia, Jehuda ha Levi, Ibn Gabirol,
Bahya, Ibn Daud, and Maimonides. The philosophical hymns
and the articles of faith, both of which found a place in the liturgy
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
of the Synagogue, were the work of their followers. The
highest mode of adoring God seemed to be the elaboration of
the idea of His unity to its logical conclusion, which satisfied
the philosophical mind, though often remote from the understanding
of the multitude. For centuries the supreme effort
of Jewish thought was to remove Him from the possibility of
comparison with any other being, and to abolish every conception
which might impair His absolute and simple unity.
This mental activity filled the dwellings of Israel with light,
even when the darkness of ignorance covered the lands of
Christendom, dispelled only here and there by rays of knowledge
emanating from Jewish quarters.<note place='foot'>See Draper's
<hi rend='italic'>Conflict between Religion and Science</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
12. The proofs of the unity of God adduced by Mohammedan
and Jewish thinkers were derived from the rational
order, design, and unity of the cosmos, and from the laws of
the mind itself. These aided in endowing Judaism with a
power of conviction which rendered futile the conversionist
efforts of the Church, with its arguments and its threats.
Israel's only One proved to be the God of truth, high and
holy to both the mind and the heart. The Jewish masters of
thought rendered Him the highest object of their speculation,
only to bow in awe before Him who is beyond all human
ken; the Jewish martyrs likewise cheerfully offered up their
lives in His honor; and thus all hearts echoed the battle-cry
of the centuries, <q>Hear O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord
is One,</q> and all minds were illumined by the radiant hope,
<q>The Lord will be King of the earth; on that day the Lord
shall be One, and His name shall be One.</q>
</p>

<p>
13. Under all conditions, however, the doctrine of unity
remained free from outward compulsion and full of intrinsic
vigor and freshness. There was still room for differences of
opinion, such as whether God's life, power, wisdom, and unity
are attributes&mdash;distinct from His being, and qualifying it,&mdash;or
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
whether they are inherent in His nature, comprising His
very essence. This controversy aimed to determine the conception
of God, either by Aristotelian rationalism, as represented
by Maimonides, or by the positive religious assumptions
of Crescas and others.
</p>

<p>
This is Maimonides' statement of the unity: <q>God is one;
that is, He is unlike any other unit, whether made one in
point of numbers or species, or by virtue of composition, separation,
and simplification. He is one in Himself, there being
no multiplicity in Him. His unity is beyond all definition.</q><note place='foot'>Maim.:
<hi rend='italic'>Yesode ha Torah</hi>, I, 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
Ibn Gabirol in his <q>Crown of Royalty</q> puts the same
thought into poetic form: <q>One art Thou; the wise wonder
at the mystery of Thy unity, not knowing what it is. One
art Thou; not like the one of dimension or number, as neither
addition nor change, neither attribute nor quality affects
Thy being. Thou art God, who sustainest all beings by Thy
divinity, who holdest all creatures in Thy unity. Thou art
God, and there is no distinction between Thy unity, Thy
eternity, and Thy being. All is mystery, and however the
names may differ, they all tell that Thou art but one.</q><note place='foot'>Sachs,
l. c., 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
14. Side by side with this rationalistic trend, Judaism
always contained a current of mysticism. The mystics accepted
literally the anthropomorphic pictures of the Deity in
the Bible, and did not care how much they might affect the
spirituality and unity of God. The philosophic schools had
contended against the anthropomorphic views of the older
mystics, and thus had brought higher views of the Godhead
to dominance; but when the rationalistic movement had
spent its force, the reaction came in the form of the Cabbalah,
the secret lore which claimed to have been <q>transmitted</q>
(according to the meaning of the word) from a hoary past.
The older system of thought had stripped the Deity of all
reality and had robbed religion of all positiveness; now, in
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
contrast, the soul demanded a God of revelation through
faith in whom might come exaltation and solace.<note place='foot'>See Schmiedl,
l. c., 239-258.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless the Maimonidean articles of faith were adopted
into the liturgy because of their emphasis on the absolute unity
and indivisibility of God, by which they constituted a vigorous
protest against the Christian dogma. Judaism ever found
its strength in God the only One, and will find Him ever
anew a source of inspiration and rejuvenation.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIV. God's Omnipotence and Omniscience</head>

<p>
1. Among all the emotions which underlie our God-consciousness
the foremost is the realization of our own weakness
and helplessness. This makes us long for One mightier than
ourselves, for the Almighty whose acts are beyond comparison.
The first attribute, therefore, with which we feeble mortals
invest our Deity is omnipotence. Thus the pagan ascribes
supreme power over their different realms to his various deities.
Hence the name for God among all the Semites is
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>El</foreign>&mdash;<q>the
Powerful One.</q><note place='foot'>See Hebrew Dictionary,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>El</foreign>; comp. Dillmann, l. c.,
210, 244.</note> Judaism claims for God absolute and unlimited
power over all that is. It declares Him to be the source
and essence of all strength, the almighty Creator and Ruler
of the universe. All that exists is His creation; all that occurs
is His achievement. He is frequently called by the rabbis
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ha Geburah</foreign>, the
Omnipotence.<note place='foot'>See Levy, W. B.:
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Geburah</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. The historical method of study seems to indicate that
various cosmic potencies were worshiped in primitive life
either singly or collectively under the name of
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign>, <q>divine
powers,</q> or <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Zibeoth Elohim</foreign>,
<q>hosts of divine powers.</q> With
the acceptance of the idea of divine omnipotence, these were
united into a confederacy of divine forces under the dominion
of the one God, the <q>Lord of Hosts.</q> Still these powers of
heaven, earth and the deep by no means at once surrendered
their identity. Most of them became angels, <q>messengers</q> of
the omnipotent God, or <q>spirits</q> roaming in the realms
where once they ruled, while a few were relegated as monsters
to the region of superstition. The heathen deities, which
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
persisted for a while in popular belief, were also placed with
the angels as <q>heavenly rulers</q> of their respective lands or
nations about the throne of the Most High. At all events,
Israel's God was enthroned above them all as Lord of the
universe. In fact, the Alexandrian translators and some of the
rabbis actually explained in this sense the Biblical names
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>El Shaddai</foreign> and
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>J.H.V.H. Zebaoth</foreign>.<note place='foot'>See
Septuagint to Job V, 17; VIII, 3, and II Sam. V, 10; VII, 8, and
Ber. 31 b.</note> The medieval philosophers,
however, took a backward step away from the Biblical view
when, under the influence of Neoplatonism, they represented
the angels and the spirits of the stars as intermediary forces.<note place='foot'>See
Schmiedl, l. c., 67 ff. David Neumark thinks that both the prophet
Jeremiah and the Mishnah knew and rejected the belief in angels. See his
article <hi rend='italic'>Ikkarim</hi> in Ozar Ha Yahduth.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. According to the Bible, both the Creation and the order
of the universe testify to divine omnipotence. God called
all things into existence by His almighty word, unassisted by
His heavenly messengers. He alone stretched out the heavens,
set bounds to the sea, and founded the earth on pillars that
it be not moved; none was with Him to partake in the work.
This is the process of creation according to the first chapter
of Genesis and the fortieth chapter of Isaiah. So He appears
throughout the Scriptures as <q>the Doer of wonders,</q>
<q>whose arm never waxes short</q> to carry out His will. <q>He
fainteth not, neither is He weary.</q> His dominion extends
over the sea and the storm, over life and death, over high and
low. Intermediary forces participating in His work are
never mentioned. They are referred to only in the poetic
description of creation in the book of Job: <q>Where wast
thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?... When the
morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted
for joy.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. XVIII, 14;
Num. XI, 13; Is. XL, 12; Jer. V, 22; X, 12; XXVII,
5; XXXII, 17; Zach. VIII, 6; Job XXXVIII, 7; XLII, 1.</note>
</p>

<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>

<p>
Proof of God's supreme power was found particularly in
history, either in His miraculous changing of the natural
order, or in His defeat of the mighty hostile armies which
bade Him defiance.<note place='foot'>Deut. III. 24;
XI, 3; XXVI, 8; XXIX, 2; Jer. X, 6; Ps. LXV, 7;
LXVI, 7; LXIV-LXXVIII; I Chron. XXIX, 11, 12.</note>
Often the heathen deities or the celestial
powers are introduced as dramatic figures to testify to the
triumph of the divine omnipotence, as when the Lord is said
to <q>execute judgment against the gods of Egypt</q> or when
<q>the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.</q><note place='foot'>Ex. XII, 12;
Judges V, 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. God's power is limited only by His own volition. <q>He
doeth what He willeth.</q><note place='foot'>Daniel IV, 35.</note>
In man the will and the power
for a certain act are far apart, and often directly conflicting.
Not so with God, for the very idea of God is perfection, and
His will implies necessarily the power to accomplish the desired
end. His will is determined only by such factors as His
knowledge and His moral self-restraint.
</p>

<p>
5. Therefore the idea of God's omnipotence must be coupled
with that of His omniscience. Both His power and His
knowledge are unlike man's in being without limitation.
When we repeat the Biblical terms of an all-seeing, all-hearing,
and all-knowing God, we mean in the first instance that the
limitation of space does not exist for Him. He beholds the
extreme parts of the earth and observes all that happens under
the heavens; nothing is hidden from His sight. He not only
sees the deeds of men, He also searches their thoughts. Looking
into their hearts, He knows the word, ere it is upon the
tongue. Looking into the future, he knows every creature,
ere it enters existence. <q>The darkness and the light are alike
to Him.</q> With one glance He surveys all that is and all that
happens.<note place='foot'>Ps. XI, 4; XXXIII, 13 f.; CXXXIX; Jer. XI, 20; XVII, 10; Job
XII, 13; Dan. II, 20 f.</note> He is, as the rabbis express it, <q>the all-seeing Eye
and the all-hearing Ear.</q><note place='foot'>Aboth II, 1.</note>
</p>

<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>

<p>
In like manner the distinctions of time disappear before
Him. The entire past is unrolled before His sight; His book
records all that men do or suffer, even their tears;<note place='foot'>Mal.
III, 16; Ps. LVI, 9.</note> and there
is no forgetfulness with Him. The remotest future also is
open before Him, for it is planned by Him, and in it He has
allotted to each being its days and its steps.<note place='foot'>See New
Year liturgy, Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerbook</hi>, 249.</note> Yea, as He
beholds events ere they transpire, so He reveals the secrets of
the future to His chosen ones, in order to warn men of the
judgments that threaten them.<note place='foot'>Amos III, 7.; Gen. XVIII, 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. The idea of divine omniscience could ripen only gradually
in the minds of the people. The older and more child-like
conception still remains in the stories of the Deluge and the
Tower of Babel, where God descended from heaven to watch
the doings of men, and repented of what He had done.<note place='foot'>Gen.
VI, 5; XI, 5; XVIII, 21.</note> Obviously
the idea of divine omniscience took hold of the people
as a result of the admonitions of the prophets.
</p>

<p>
7. Philosophical inquiry into the ideas of the divine omnipotence
and omniscience, however, discloses many difficulties.
The Biblical assertion that nothing is impossible to God will
not stand the test as soon as we ask seriously whether God
can make the untrue true,&mdash;as making two times two to
equal five&mdash;or whether He can declare the wrong to be right.
Obviously He cannot overturn the laws of mathematical truth
or of moral truth, without at the same time losing His nature
as the Source and Essence of all truth. Nor can He abrogate
the laws of nature, which are really His own rules for His
creation, without detracting from both His omniscience and
the immutability of His will. This question will be discussed
more fully in connection with miracles, in chapter
<ref target='Chapter_XXVII'>XXVII</ref>.
</p>

<p>
Together with the problem of the divine omniscience arises
the difficulty of reconciling this with our freedom of will and
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
our moral responsibility. Would not His foreknowledge of
our actions in effect determine them? This difficulty can
only be solved by a proper conception of the freedom of the
will, and will be discussed in that connection in chapter
<ref target='Chapter_XXXVII'>XXXVII</ref>.
</p>

<p>
Altogether, we must guard against applying our human type
of knowledge to God. Man, limited by space and time,
obtains his knowledge of things and events by his senses,
becoming aware of them separately as they exist either beside
each other or in succession. With God all knowledge is
complete; there is no growth of knowledge from yesterday to
to-day, no knowledge of only a part instead of the whole of
the world. His omniscience and omnipotence are bound up
with His omnipresence and eternity. <q>For My thoughts are
not your thoughts, neither are your ways My ways, saith
the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so
are My ways higher than your ways, and My thoughts than
your thoughts.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. LV, 8, 9.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XV. God's Omnipresence and Eternity</head>

<p>
1. As soon as man awakens to a higher consciousness of
God, he realizes the vast distance between his own finite
being limited by space and time, and the Infinite Being which
rules everywhere and unceasingly in lofty grandeur and unlimited
power. His very sense of being hedged in by the
bounds and imperfections of a finite existence makes him long
for the infinite God, unlimited in might, and brings to him
the feeling of awe before His greatness. But this conception
of God as the omnipresent and everlasting Spirit, as distinct
from any created being, is likewise the result of many stages
of growing thought.
</p>

<p>
2. The primitive mind imagines God as dwelling in a
lofty place, whence He rules the earth beneath, descending
at times to take part in the affairs of men, to tarry among
them, or to walk with them.<note place='foot'>Gen. IV, 16;
XI, 5; XVIII, 21; XXVIII, 16; Deut. XXVI, 15; Micah
I, 3; see Strauss, l. c., I, 548 f.</note> The people adhered largely to
this conception during the Biblical period, as they considered
as the original seat of the Deity, first Paradise, later on Sinai
or Zion, and finally the far-off heavens. It required prophetic
vision to discern that <q>the heavens and the heavens' heavens
do not encompass God's majesty,</q> expressed also in poetic
imagery that <q>the heaven is My throne and the earth My
footstool.</q><note place='foot'>I Kings VIII, 27; Isa. LXVI,
1.</note> The classic form of this idea of the divine omnipresence
is found in the oft-quoted passage from Psalm
CXXXIX.<note place='foot'>See above, Chapter
<ref target='Chapter_XII_Section_5'>XII, 5</ref>.</note>
</p>

<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>

<p>
3. The dwelling places of God are to give way the moment
His omnipresence is understood as penetrating the universe to
such an extent that nothing escapes His glance nor lies without
His dominion.<note place='foot'>Comp. Amos IX, 2; Jer. XXIII,
24.</note> They are then transformed into places
where He had manifested His Name, His Glory, or His Presence
(<q>Countenance,</q> in the Hebrew). In this way certain
emanations or powers of God were formed which could be
located in a certain space without impairing the divine omnipresence.
These intermediary powers will be the theme of
chapter <ref target='Chapter_XXXII'>XXXII</ref>.
</p>

<p>
The following dialogue illustrates this stage of thought:
A heretic once said sarcastically to Gamaliel II, <q>Ye say that
where ten persons assemble for worship, there the divine
majesty (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shekinah</foreign>) descends upon them; how
many such majesties are there?</q> To which Gamaliel replied: <q>Does
not the one orb of day send forth a million rays upon the earth?
And should not the majesty of God, which is a million times
brighter than the sun, be reflected in every spot on earth?</q><note place='foot'>Sanh.
39 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. Nevertheless a conception of pure spirit is very difficult
to attain, even in regard to God. The thought of His omnipresence
is usually interpreted by imagining some ethereal
substance which expands infinitely, as Ibn Ezra and Saadia
before him were inclined to do,<note place='foot'>Comp. Kaufmann,
l. c., 70 and 71, notes 130, 131; Strauss, l. c., I, 551.</note> or by picturing Him as a
sort of all-encompassing Space, in accordance with the
rabbis.<note place='foot'><foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Makom</foreign>, see above,
Chapter <ref target='Chapter_X_Section_8'>X, 8-9</ref>; Schechter,
<hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>, 26 f.</note>
The New Testament writers and the Church fathers
likewise spoke of God as Spirit, but really had in mind, for
the most part, an ethereal substance resembling light pervading
cosmic space. The often-expressed belief that man may
see God after death rests upon this conception of God as a
substance perceptible to the mind.<note place='foot'>Luk. 45 b;
comp. I Corinth. XIII, 12, based on Ex. XXXIII, 28; Ps.
XVII, 15.</note>
</p>

<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>

<p>
A higher standpoint is taken by a thinker such as Ibn
Gabirol, who finds God's omnipresence in His all-pervading
will and intellect.<note place='foot'>See Kaufmann, l. c., 100
f.</note> But this type of divine omnipresence is
rather divine immanence. The religious consciousness has a
quite different picture of God, a self-conscious Personality,
ever near to man, ever scanning his acts, his thoughts, and his
motives. Here philosophy and religion part company. The
former must abstain from the assumption of a divine personality;
the latter cannot do without it. The God of religion
must partake of the knowledge and the feelings of His worshiper,
must know his every impulse and idea, and must feel
with him in his suffering and need. God's omnipresence is in
this sense a postulate of religion.
</p>

<p>
5. The second earthly and human limitation is that of time.
Confined by space and time, man casts his eyes upward toward
a Being who shall be infinite and eternal. Whatever time
begets, time swallows up again. Transitoriness is the fate of
all things. Everything which enters existence must end at
last. <q>Also heaven and earth perish and wax old like a
garment. Only God remains forever the same, and His years
have no end. He is from everlasting to everlasting, the first
and the last.</q> So speak prophet and psalmist, voicing a
universal thought<note place='foot'>Isa. XLVIII, 12;
Ps. XC, 2 f.; CII, 26, 27. On the process of development
of the idea of eternity, see Neumark, l. c., II, 77.</note>;
and our liturgical poet sings:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The Lord of all did reign supreme</q></l>
<l>Ere yet this world was made and formed;</l>
<l>When all was finished by His will,</l>
<l>Then was His name as King proclaimed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>And should these forms no more exist,</q></l>
<l>He still will rule in majesty;</l>
<l>He was, He is, He shall remain,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>His glory never shall decrease.</q><note place='foot'>Adon
Olam, Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerbook</hi>, p. 3.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>

<p>
6. But the idea of God's eternity also presents certain
difficulties to the thinking mind. As Creator and Author of
the universe, God is the First Cause, without beginning or
end, the Source of all existence; as Ruler and Master of the
world, He maintains all things through all eternity; though
heaven and earth <q>wax old like a garment,</q> He outlasts them
all. Now, if He is to manifest these powers from everlasting
to everlasting, He must ever remain the same. Consequently,
we must add immutability as a corollary of eternity, if the
latter is to mean anything. It is not enough to state that God
is without beginning and without end; the essential part of
the doctrine is His transcendence above the changes and conditions
of time. We mortals cannot really entertain a conception
of eternity; our nearest approach to it is an endless
succession of periods of time, a ceaseless procession of ages and
eons following each other. Endless time is not at all the same as
timelessness. Therefore eternity signifies transcendence above
all existence in time; its real meaning is
<emph>supermundaneity</emph>.<note place='foot'>See Strauss, l. c.,
562, 651; Kaufmann, l. c., 306 f.; Drummond: <hi rend='italic'>Philo</hi>,
II, 46.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. This seems the best way to avoid the difficulty which
seemed almost insuperable to the medieval thinkers, how to
reconcile a Creation at a certain time and a Creator for whom
time does not exist. In the effort to solve the difficulty, they
resorted to the Platonic and Aristotelian definition of time as
the result of the motions of the heavenly bodies; thus they
declared that time was created simultaneously with the world.
This is impossible for the modern thinker, who has learned
from Kant to regard time and space, not as external realities,
but as human modes of apperception of objects. So the contrast
between the transient character of the world and the
eternity of God becomes all the greater with the increasing
realization of the vast gap between the material world and the
divine spirit.
</p>

<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>

<p>
At this point arises a still greater difficulty. The very idea
of creation at a certain time becomes untenable in view of our
knowledge of the natural process; the universe itself, it seems
to us, extends over an infinity of space and time. Indeed,
the modern view of evolution in place of creation has the grave
danger of leading to pantheism, to a conception of the cosmos
which sees in God only an eternal energy (or substance) devoid
of free volition and self-conscious action.<note place='foot'>See Chapter
<ref target='Chapter_XXV'>XXV</ref> below.</note> We can evade
the difficulty only by assuming God's transcendence, and this
can be done in such a way as not to exclude His immanence,
or&mdash;what is the same thing&mdash;His omnipresence.
</p>

<p>
8. Both God's omnipresence and His eternity are intended
only to raise Him far above the world, out of the confines of
space and time, to represent His sublime loftiness as the
<q>Rock of Ages,</q> as holding worlds without number in <q>His
eternal arms.</q> <q>Nothing can be hidden from Him who has
reared the entire universe and is familiar with every part of it,
however remote.</q><note place='foot'>Tanh. Naso ed. Buber, 8;
Gen. R. IX, 9 with reference to Jer. XXIII, 24.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVI. God's Holiness</head>

<p>
1. Judaism recognizes two distinct types of divine attributes.
Those which we have so far considered belong to the
metaphysical group, which chiefly engage the attention of
the philosopher. They represent God as a transcendental
Being who is ever beyond our comprehension, because our
finite intellect can never grasp the infinite Spirit. They are
not descriptions, but rather inferences from the works of the
Master of the world to the Master himself. But there are
other divine attributes which we derive from our own moral
nature, and which invest our whole life with a higher moral
character. Instead of arising from the external necessity
which governs nature in its causes and effects, these rest upon
our assumption of inner freedom, setting the aims for all that
we achieve. This moral nature is realized to some extent even
by the savage, when he trembles before his deity in pangs of
conscience, or endeavors to propitiate him by sacrifices. Still,
Judaism alone fully realized the moral nature of the Deity;
this was done by investing the term <q>holiness</q> with the idea
of moral perfection, so that God became the ideal and pattern
of the loftiest morality. <q>Be ye holy, for I the Lord your
God am holy.</q><note place='foot'>Lev. XIX, 1.</note>&mdash;This
is the central and culminating idea of
the Jewish law.<note place='foot'>Comp. Dillmann, l. c.,
252 f.; Strauss, l. c., 593 f.; Rauwenhoff, l. c., 498-505;
Lazarus: <hi rend='italic'>Ethics of Judaism</hi>, Chapters IV-V.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. Holiness is the essence of all moral perfection; it is
purity unsullied by any breath of evil. True holiness can be
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
ascribed only to Divinity, above the realm of the flesh and the
senses. <q>There is none holy but the Lord, for there is none
beside Thee,</q> says Scripture.<note place='foot'>I Sam. II,
21.</note> Whether man stands on a lower
or higher level of culture, he has in all his plans and aspirations
some ideal of perfection to which he may never attain, but
which serves as the standard for his actions. The best of his
doings falls short of what he ought to do; in his highest efforts
he realizes the potentiality of better things. This ideal of
moral perfection works as the motive power of the will in setting
for it a standard; it establishes human freedom in place of
nature's compulsion, but such an ideal can emanate only from
the moral power ruling life, which we designate as the divine
Holiness.
</p>

<p>
3. Scripture says of God that He <q>walketh in holiness,</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
LXXVII, 14.</note> and
accordingly morality in man is spoken of as <q>walking in the
ways of God.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. X, 12; XI, 22, and elsewhere.</note>
<q>Walk before Me and be perfect!</q> says God to
Abraham.<note place='foot'>Gen. XVIII, 19.</note> Moses approached God with two
petitions,&mdash;the one, <q>Show me Thy ways that I may know Thee!</q> the
other, <q>Show me, I pray Thee, Thy glory!</q> In response to
the latter God said, <q>No man can see Me and live</q>, but the
former petition was granted in that the Lord revealed Himself
in His moral attributes.<note place='foot'>Ex. XXXIII,
13-23.</note> These alone can be understood and
emulated by man; in regard to the so-called metaphysical
attributes God will ever remain beyond human comprehension
and emulation.
</p>

<p>
4. In order to serve as vehicle for the expression of the
highest moral perfection, the Biblical term for holiness,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Kadosh</foreign>,
had to undergo a long process of development, obscuring its
original meaning. The history of this term gives us the
deepest insight into the working of the Jewish genius towards
the full revelation of the God of holiness. At first the word
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Kadosh</foreign><note place='foot'>See J. E., art.
Holiness. The Assyrian <foreign rend='italic'>Kuddisu</foreign> denotes <q>bright,</q>
<q>pure,</q> according to Zimmern in <hi rend='italic'>Religion und Sprache</hi>,
K. A. T., 3d ed., 603.</note> seems to have denoted unapproachableness in the
sense in which fire is unapproachable, that is, threatening and
consuming. This fiery nature was ascribed by primitive man
to all divine beings. Hence the angels are termed <q>the holy
ones</q> in Scripture.<note place='foot'>Deut. XXXIII, 3; Job V, 1; VI, 10;
XV, 15; Ps. LXXXIX, 6, 8.</note> According to both priestly practice and
popular belief, the man who approached one of these holy
ones with hand or foot, or even with his gaze, was doomed to
die.<note place='foot'>Ex. XIX, 21 f.; XXIV, 17; I Sam. VI, 20; Josh. XXIV, 19;
Isa. IV, 3; VI, 3, 13; X, 17; XXXI, 9; XXXIII, 14;
Hab. I, 13.</note> Out of such crude conceptions evolved the idea of
God's majesty as unapproachable in the sense of the sublime,
banishing everything profane from its presence, and visiting
with punishment every violation of its sanctity. The old
conception of the fiery appearance of the Deity served especially
as a figurative expression of the moral power of God,
which manifests itself as a <q>consuming fire,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. IV, 24;
Ex. XXIV, 17.</note> exterminating
evil, and making man long for the good and the true, for righteousness
and love.
</p>

<p>
5. The divine attribute of holiness has accordingly a double
meaning. On the one hand, it indicates spiritual loftiness
transcending everything sensual, which works as a purging
power of indignation at evil, rebuking injustice, impurity and
falsehood, and punishing transgression until it is removed from
the sight of God. On the other hand, it denotes the condescending
mercy of God, which, having purged the soul of wrong,
wins it for the right, and which endows man with the power of
perfecting himself, and thus leads him to the gradual building
up of the kingdom of goodness and purity on earth. This
ethical conception of holiness, which emanates from the moral
nature of God, revealed to the prophetic genius of Israel, must
not be confused with the old Semitic conception of priestly or
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
ritual holiness. Ritual holiness is purely external, and is
transferable to persons and things, to times and places, according
to their relation to the Deity. Hence the various cults applied
the term <q>holy</q> to the most abominable forms of idolatry
and impure worship.<note place='foot'>Comp. the name
<foreign rend='italic'>Kadesh</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Kedesha</foreign> for the hierodules consecrated to
Astarte. See Deut. XXIII, 18; I Kings XIV, 24; XV, 12; Hosea IV, 14.
Comp. Zimmern, l. c., p. 423.</note> The Mosaic law condemned all these as
violations of the holiness of Israel's God, but could not help
sanctioning many ordinances and rites of priestly holiness
which originated in ancient Semitic usages. Hence the two
conceptions of holiness, the priestly or external and the prophetic
or ethical, became interwoven in the Mosaic code to
such an extent as to impair the standard of ethical holiness
stressed by the prophets, the unique and lofty possession of
Judaism. Hence the letter of the Law caused a deplorable
confusion of ideas, which was utilized by the detractors of
Judaism. The liberal movement of modern Judaism, in
pointing to the prophetic ideals as the true basis of the Jewish
faith, is at the same time dispelling this ancient confusion of
the two conceptions of holiness.
</p>

<p>
6. The Levitical holiness adheres outwardly to persons and
things and consists in their separation or their reservation from
common use. In striking contrast to this, the holiness which
Judaism attributes to God denotes the highest ethical purity,
unattainable to flesh and blood, but designed for our emulation.
</p>

<p>
The contemplation of the divine holiness is to inspire man
with fear of sin and to exert a healthful influence upon his
conduct. Thus God became the hallowing power in Judaism
and its institutions, truly the <q>Holy One of Israel</q> according
to the term of Isaiah and his great exilic successor, the so-called
Deutero-Isaiah.<note place='foot'>Isa. I, 4; V, 12; X, 20; XII, 6;
XLI, 14; XLIII, 3 f.; XLV, 11; and
elsewhere.</note> Thus His holiness invested His people with
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
special sanctity and imposed upon it special obligations. In
the words of Ezekiel, God became the <q>Sanctifier of
Israel.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. XX, 12; XXXVII, 28; Ex. XXXI,
13, and elsewhere.</note>
</p>

<p>
The rabbis penetrated deeply into the spirit of Scripture,
at the same time that they adhered strictly to its letter.
While they clung tenaciously to the ritual holiness of the
priestly codes, they recognized the ideal of holiness which is
so sharply opposed in every act and thought to the demoralizing
cults of heathenism.<note place='foot'>See Sifra and Rabba to Lev. XIX, 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. Accordingly, holiness is not the metaphysical concept
which Jehuda ha Levi considers it,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cusari</hi>
IV, 3; Kaufmann, l. c., 162 f.</note> but the principle and source
of all ethics, the spirit of absolute morality, lending purpose
and value to the whole of life. As long as men do good or
shun evil through fear of punishment or hope for reward,
whether in this life or the hereafter, so long will ideal morality
remain unattained, and man cannot claim to stand upon the
ground of divine holiness. The holy God must penetrate and
control all of life&mdash;such is the essence of Judaism. The true
aim of human existence is not salvation of the soul,&mdash;a desire
which is never quite free from selfishness,&mdash;but holiness
emulating God, striving to do good for the sake of the good
without regard to recompense, and to shun evil because it is
evil, aside from all consequences.<note place='foot'>Aboth, I, 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. The fact is that holiness is a religious term, based upon
divine revelation, not a philosophical one resting upon speculative
reasoning. It is a postulate of our moral nature that all
life is governed by a holy Will to which we must submit
willingly, and which makes for the good. How volition and
compulsion are with God one and the same, how the good
exists in God without the bad, or holiness and moral purpose
without unholy or immoral elements, how God can be exactly
opposite to all we know of man,&mdash;this is a question which
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
philosophy is unable to answer. In fact, holiness is best
defined negatively, as the <q>negation of all that man from his
own experience knows to be unholy.</q> These words of the
Danish philosopher Rauwenhoff are made still clearer by the
following observations: <q>The strength in the idea of holiness
lies exactly in its negative character. There is no comparison
of higher or lesser degree possible between man's imperfections
and God's perfect goodness. Instead, there is an absolute contrast
between mankind which, even in its noblest types, must
wrestle with the power of evil, and God, in whom nothing
can be imagined which would even suggest the possibility of
any moral shortcoming or imperfection.</q><note place='foot'>Rauwenhoff,
l. c., 504.</note> As the prophet
says, <q>Thou art too pure of eyes to look complacently upon
evil,</q><note place='foot'>Hab. I, 13.</note>
and according to the Psalmist, <q>Who shall ascend into
the mountain of the Lord, and who shall stand in His holy
place? He that hath clean hands and a pure
heart.</q><note place='foot'>Psalm XXIV, 4-5.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. The idea of holiness became the preëminent feature of
Judaism, so that the favorite name for God in Rabbinical
literature was <q>the Holy One, blessed be He,</q> and the acme of
all ceremonial and moral laws alike was found in <q>the Hallowing
of His name.</q><note place='foot'>L. Lazarus: <hi rend='italic'>Z.
Characteristik d. juedisch. Ethik</hi>, 40-45; M. Lazarus: <hi rend='italic'>Ethics
of Judaism</hi>, p. 184.</note> If the rabbis as followers of the Priestly
Code were compelled to lay great stress upon ritual holiness,
they yet beheld in it the means of moral purification. They
never lost sight of the prophetic principle that moral purity is
the object of all human life, for <q>the holy God is sanctified
through righteousness.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. V, 16.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVII. God's Wrath and Punishment</head>

<p>
1. Scripture speaks frequently of the anger and zeal of God
and of His avenging sword and judgment, so as to give the
impression that <q>the Old Testament God is a God of wrath and
vengeance.</q> As a matter of fact, these attributes are merely
emanations of His holiness, the guide and incentive to moral
action in man. The burning fire of the divine holiness aims
to awaken the dormant seeds of morality in the human soul
and to ripen them into full growth. Whenever we to-day
would speak of pangs of conscience, of bitter remorse, Scripture
uses figurative language and describes how God's wrath is
kindled against the wrongdoing of the people, and how fire
blazes forth from His nostrils to consume them in His anger.
The nearer man stands to nature, the more tempestuous are
the outbursts of his passion, and the more violent is the reaction
of his repentance. Yet this very reaction impresses him as
though wrought from outside or above by the offended Deity.
Thus the divine wrath becomes a means of moral education,
exactly as the parents' indignation at the child's offenses is
part of his training in morality.
</p>

<p>
2. Thus the first manifestation of God's holiness is His
indignation at falsehood and violence, His hatred of evil and
wrongdoing. The longer men persist in sin, the more does He
manifest Himself as <q>the angry God,</q> as a <q>consuming fire</q>
which destroys evil with holy zeal.<note place='foot'>Comp. Dillmann,
l. c., 258 f.; J. E., art. <q>Anger.</q></note> The husbandman cannot
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
expect the good harvest until he has weeded out the tares from
the field; so God, in educating man, begins by purging the
soul from all its evil inclinations, and this zeal is all the more
unsparing as the good is finally to triumph in His eternal plan
of universal salvation. We must bear in mind that Judaism
does not personify evil as a power hostile to God, hence the
whole problem is only one of purifying the human soul. Before
the sun of God's grace and mercy is to shine, bearing life
and healing for all humanity, His wrath and punitive justice
must ever burst forth to cleanse the world of its sin. For
as long as evil continues unchecked, so long cannot the
divine holiness pour forth its all-forbearing goodness and
love.
</p>

<p>
3. On this account the first revelation of God on Sinai
was as <q>a jealous God, who visiteth the sins of the
fathers upon the children and the children's children until
the third and fourth generation.</q> So the prophets, from
Moses to Malachi, speak ever of God's anger, which comes
with the fury of nature's unchained forces, to terrify and overwhelm
all living beings.<note place='foot'>Ex. XX, 5; Isa. XXX, 27 f.;
Nahum I, 5 f.</note> Thus Scripture considers all the
great catastrophes of the hoary past,&mdash;flood, earthquakes,
and the rain of fire and brimstone that destroys cities&mdash;as
judgments of the divine anger on sinful generations. Wickedness
in general causes His displeasure, but His wrath is provoked
especially by violations of the social order, by desecrations
of His sanctuary, or attacks on His covenant, and His
anger is kindled for the poor and helpless, when they are
oppressed and deprived of their rights.<note place='foot'>Ex. XXII, 23;
Num. XVII, 10 f.; XXV, 3; Deut. XXIX, 19; XXXII,
21; Isa. IX, 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. Thus the divine holiness was felt more and more as a
moral force, and that which appeared in pre-prophetic times
to be an elemental power of the celestial ire became a refining
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
flame, purging men of dross as in a crucible. <q>I will not execute
the fierceness of Mine anger,</q> says the prophet, <q>for I
am God and not man, the Holy One in the midst of thee, and
I will not come in fury.</q><note place='foot'>Hosea XI, 9.</note>
So sings the Psalmist, <q>His anger is but for
a moment; His favor for a life-time.</q><note place='foot'>Psalm XXX.</note> In the same
spirit the rabbis interpreted the verse of the Decalogue, <q>The
sin of the fathers is visited upon the children and children's children
only if they continue to act as their fathers did, and are
themselves haters of God.</q><note place='foot'>Targum to Ex. XX, 3; Sanh. 27 b.</note>
</p>

<p>
The fact is that Israel in Canaan had become addicted to
all the vices of idolatry, and if they were to be trained to moral
purity and to loyalty to the God of the Covenant, they must
be taught fear and awe before the flame of the divine wrath.
Only after that could the prophet address himself to the conscience
of the individual, saying:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire?</q></l>
<l>Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?</l>
<l>He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly;</l>
<l>He that despiseth the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from
holding of bribes,</l>
<l>That stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes
from looking upon evil;</l>
<l>He shall dwell on high; his place of defense shall be the munitions of
rocks;</l>
<l>His bread shall be given, his water shall be sure.</l>
<l>Thine eyes shall see the King in His beauty; they shall behold a land
<q rend='post'>stretching afar.</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
XXXIII, 14-17.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Here we behold the fiery element of the divine holiness
partly depicted as a reality and partly spiritualized. The
last of the prophets compares the divine wrath to a melting
furnace, which on the Day of Judgment is to consume evildoers
as stubble, while to those who fear the Lord He
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
shall appear as the sun of righteousness with healing on
its wings.<note place='foot'>Mal. III, 2, 19 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. The idea as expressed by the prophets, then, was that
God's anger will visit the wicked, and particularly the ungodly
nations of heathendom, and that He shall judge all creatures in
fire.<note place='foot'>Deut. XXXII, 35; comp. Sifre, 325;
Geiger: <hi rend='italic'>Urschrift</hi>, 247, regarding
Samaritan text. Zeph. I, 15; Isa. LXVI, 15-16.</note>
This was significantly altered under Persian influence,
when the Jew began to regard the world to come as promising
to the righteous greater bliss than the present one. Then the
day of divine wrath meant doom eternal for evil-doers, who
were to fall into the fiery depths of Gehenna, <q>their worm is
never to die and their fire never to be quenched.</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
XVLI, 24.</note> This
became the prevailing view of the rabbis, of the Apocalyptics
and also of the New Testament and the Church literature.<note place='foot'>See J. E.,
art. <q>Gehenna</q>; Mid. Teh. to Ps. LXXVI, 11, and LXXIX;
Ned. 32 a; Taan. 9 b; Yer. Taan. II, 65 b; Ab. Zar. 4 a and b; 18 b;
Ber. 7 a; Shab. 118 a; Sanh. 110 b; Gen. R. VI, 9; XXVI, 11, et al.; comp.
Romans II, 5; Eph. V, 6; I Thess. I, 10.</note>
The Jewish propaganda in the Hellenistic literature, however,
combined the fire of Gehenna with the Stoic, or pagan, view
of a general world-conflagration, and announced a general
doomsday for the heathen world, unless they be converted to
the belief in Israel's one and holy God, and ceased violating the
fundamental (Noachian) laws of humanity.<note place='foot'>Sibyll. II,
170, 285; III, 541, 556 f., 672-697, 760, 810; Enoch XCI, 7-9.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. A higher view of the punitive anger of God is taken by
Beruriah, the noble wife of R. Meir,<note place='foot'>Ber. 10 a;
Midr. Teh. to Ps. CIV, 35.</note>&mdash;if, indeed, the wife of
the saintly Abba Helkiah did not precede her<note place='foot'>Tan.
23 b.</note>&mdash;in suggesting
a different reading of the Biblical text, as to make it offer
the lesson: <q>not the sinners shall perish from the earth, but
the sins.</q> From a more philosophical viewpoint both Juda ha
Levi and Maimonides hold that the anger which we ascribe to
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
God is only the transference of the anger which we actually
feel at the sight of evildoing. Similarly, when we speak of the
consuming fire of hell, we depict the effect which the fear of
God must have on our inner life, until the time shall come
when we shun evil as ungodly and love the good because it is
both good and God-like.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cusari</hi>
IV, 5; <hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi> I, 36, and Commentary to Sanh. X, I.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVIII. God's Long-suffering and Mercy</head>

<p>
1. In one of the little known apocryphal writings, the Testament
of Abraham, a beautiful story is told of the patriarch.
Shortly before his death, the archangel Michael drove him
along the sky in the heavenly chariot. Looking down upon
the earth, he saw companies of thieves and murderers, adulterers,
and other evil-doers pursuing their nefarious practices,
and in righteous indignation he cried out: <q>Oh would to God
that fire, destruction, and death should instantly befall these
criminals!</q> No sooner had he spoken these words than the
doom he pronounced came upon those wicked men. But
then spoke the Lord God to the heavenly charioteer Michael:
<q>Stop at once, lest My righteous servant Abraham in his just
indignation bring death upon all My creatures, because they
are not as righteous as he. He has not learned to restrain his
anger.</q><note place='foot'>Testament of Abraham, A, X.</note>
Thus, indeed, the wrath kindled at the sight of
wrongdoing would consume the sinner at once, were it not
for another quality in God, called in Scripture <emph>long-suffering</emph>.
By this He restrains His anger and gives the sinner time to
improve his ways. Though every wicked deed provokes
Him to immediate punishment, yet He shows compassion
upon the feeble mortal. <q>Even in wrath He remembereth
compassion.</q><note place='foot'>Hab. III, 2.</note>
<q>He hath no delight in the death of the sinner,
but that he shall return from his ways and live.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. XVIII,
23, 32; XXXIII, 11.</note> The divine
holiness does not merely overwhelm and consume; its essential
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
aim is the elevation of man, the effort to endow him with a
higher life.
</p>

<p>
2. It is perfectly true that a note of rigor and of profound
earnestness runs through the pages of Holy Writ. The
prophets, law-givers, and psalmists speak incessantly of how
guilt brings doom upon the lands and nations. As the father
who is solicitous of the honor of his household punishes unrelentingly
every violation of morality within it, so the Holy One
of Israel watches zealously over His people's loyalty to His
covenant. His glorious name, His holy majesty cannot be
violated with immunity from His dreaded wrath. There is
nothing of the joyous abandon which was predominant in
the Greek nature and in the Olympian gods. The ideal of
holiness was presented by the God of Israel, and all the doings
of men appeared faulty beside it.
</p>

<p>
But its power of molding character is shown by Judaism at
this very point, in that it does not stop at the condemnation of
the sinner. It holds forth the promise of God's forbearance to
man in his shortcomings, due to His compassion on the weakness
of flesh and blood. He waits for man, erring and stumbling,
until by striving and struggling he shall attain a higher
state of purity. This is the bright, uplifting side of the Jewish
idea of the divine holiness. In this is the innermost nature
of God disclosed. In fear and awe of Him who is enthroned
on high, <q>before whom even the angels are not pure,</q> man,
conscious of his sinfulness, sinks trembling into the dust before
the Judge of the whole earth. But the grace and mercy of the
long-suffering Ruler lift him up and imbue him with courage
and strength to acquire a new life and new energy. Thus the
oppressive burden of guilt is transformed into an uplifting
power through the influence of the holy God.
</p>

<p>
3. The predominance in God of mildness and mercy over
punitive anger is expressed most strikingly in the revelation
to Moses, when he had entreated God to let him see His ways.
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
The people had provoked God's anger by their faithlessness
in the worship of the golden calf, and He had threatened to
consume them, when Moses interceded in their behalf. Then
the Lord passed by him, and proclaimed: <q>The Lord, the
Lord, God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant
in goodness and truth, keeping mercy unto the thousandth
generation, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin; and
that will by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of
the fathers upon the children and upon the children's children,
unto the third and unto the fourth generation.</q><note place='foot'>Ex.
XXXII-XXXIV, 7. Comp. Num. XIV, 18.</note> Such a
passage shows clearly the progress in the knowledge of God's
nature. For Abraham and the traditions of the patriarchs
God was the righteous Judge, punishing the transgressors.
He is represented in the same way in the Decalogue on
Sinai.<note place='foot'>Gen. XIX, 1-28; Ex. XX, 5-6.</note>
Was this to be the final word? Was Israel chosen by God as
His covenant people, only to encounter the full measure of His
just but relentless anger and to be consumed at once for the
violation of this covenant? Therefore Moses wrestled with
his God. Filled with compassionate love for his people, he is
willing to offer his life as their ransom. And should God himself
lack this fullness of love and pity, of which even a human
being is capable? Then, as from a dark cloud, there flashed
suddenly upon him the light of a new revelation; he became
aware of the higher truth, that above the austerity of God's
avenging anger prevails the tender forgiveness of His mercy;
that beyond the consuming zeal of His punitive justice shines
the sun-like splendor of His grace and love. The rabbis find
the expression of mercy especially in the name JHVH (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
<q>the One who shall ever be</q>) which is significantly placed
here at the head of the divine attributes. Indeed, only He
who is the same from everlasting to everlasting, and to whom
to-morrow is like yesterday, can show forbearance to erring
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
man, because in whatsoever he has failed yesterday he may
make good to-morrow.
</p>

<p>
4. Like Moses, the master of the prophets, so the prophet
Hosea also learned in hard spiritual struggle to know the divine
attribute of mercy and lovingkindness. His own wife had
proved faithless, and had broken the marital covenant; still
his love survived, so that he granted her forgiveness when she
was forsaken, and took her back to his home. Then, in his
distress at the God-forsaken state of Israel through her faithlessness,
he asked himself: <q>Will God reject forever the nation
which He espoused, because it broke the covenant? Will
not He also grant forgiveness and mercy?</q> The divine
answer came to him out of the depths of his own compassionate
soul. Upon the crown of God's majesty which Amos had
beheld all effulgent with justice and righteousness, he placed
the most precious gem, reflecting the highest quality of God&mdash;His
gracious and all-forgiving love.<note place='foot'>Hosea I-III;
XI, 1-9; XIV, 5. Comp. Micah XIII, 18; Jer. III, 8-12;
Isa. LIV, 6-8; LVII, 16 f.; Joel II, 13; Jonah IV, 2, 10 f.; Lam. III, 31;
Ps. LXXVIII, 38 et al. See Dillmann, l. c., 263 f.; Davidson
<hi rend='italic'>Theology of O. T.</hi>, 132 f.</note> Whether the priority
in this great truth belongs to Hosea or Moses is a question for
historical Bible research to answer, but it is of no consequence
to Jewish theology.
</p>

<p>
5. Certainly Scripture represents God too much after
human fashion, when it ascribes to him changes of mood from
anger to compassion, or speaks of His repentance.<note place='foot'>Gen. VI, 6;
I Sam. XV, 11; Jer. XVIII, 7-10; Joel II, 14; Jonah III,
10; IV, 2.</note> But we
must bear in mind that the prophets obtained their insight
into the ways of God by this very process of transferring their
own experience to the Deity. And on the other hand, we are
told that <q>God is not a man that He should lie, neither the
son of man that He should repent.</q><note place='foot'>Num. XXIII, 19;
I Sam. XV, 29; see Targum and commentaries.</note> All these anthropomorphic
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
pictures of God were later avoided by the ancient
Biblical translators by means of paraphrase, and by the philosophers
by means of allegory.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art.
Anthropomorphism and Allegorical Interpretation.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. According to the Midrashic interpretation of the passage
from the Pentateuch quoted above, Moses desired to ascertain
whether God ruled the world with His justice or with His
mercy, and the answer was: <q>Behold, I shall let My <emph>goodness</emph>
pass before thee. For I owe nothing to any of My creatures,
but My actions are prompted only by My grace and good will,
through which I give them all that they possess.</q><note place='foot'>Tanh.
Waethhanan, ed. Buber, 3.</note> According
to Judaism justice and mercy are intertwined in God's government
of the world; the former is the pillar of the cosmic
structure, and the latter the measuring line. No mortal could
stand before God, were justice the only standard; but we subsist
on His mercy, which lends us the boons of life without our
meriting them. That which is not good in us now is to become
good through our effort toward the best. God's grace underlies
this possibility.
</p>

<p>
Accordingly, the divine holiness has two aspects, the overwhelming
wrath of His justice and the uplifting grace of His
long-suffering. Without justice there could be no fear of
God, no moral earnestness; without mercy only condemnation
and perdition would remain. As the rabbis tell us, both
justice and mercy had their share in the creation of man, for
in man both good and bad appear and struggle for supremacy.
All generations need the divine grace that they may have time
and opportunity for improvement.<note place='foot'>Gen. R. VIII,
4-5. See Morris Joseph: <hi rend='italic'>Judaism as Creed and Life</hi>, p. 59,
90-95.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. Thus this conception of grace is far deeper and worthier of
God than is that of Paulinian Christianity; for grace in Paul's
sense is arbitrary in action and dependent upon the acceptance
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
of a creed, therefore the very reverse of impartial justice. In
Judaism divine grace is not offered as a bait to make men
believe, but as an incentive to moral improvement. The God
of holiness, who inflicts wounds upon the guilty soul by bitter
remorse, offers also healing through His compassion. Justice
and mercy are not two separate powers or persons in the
Deity, as with the doctrine of the Church; they are the two
sides of the same divine power. <q>I am the Lord before sin
was committed, and I am the Lord after sin is committed</q>&mdash;so
the rabbis explain the repetition of the name JHVH in the
revelation to Moses.<note place='foot'>R. h. Sh. 17 b;
compare, J. Davidson, 134; Koeberle: <hi rend='italic'>Suende und
Gnade</hi>, 1905, p. 625, 634 f.; but p. 658, 614, are misleading; Weber, l. c., 154,
260, 303 f., altogether misrepresents the Jewish doctrine of grace.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIX. God's Justice</head>

<p>
1. The unshakable faith of the Jewish people was ever sustained
by the consciousness that its God is a God of justice.
The conviction that He will not suffer wrong to go unpunished
was read into all the stories of the hoary past. The Babylonian
form of these legends in common with all ancient folk-lore
ascribes human calamity to blind fate or to the caprice of the
gods, but the Biblical narratives assume that evil does not
befall men undeserved, and therefore always ascribe ruin or
death to human transgression. So the Jewish genius beheld
in the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah a divine judgment
upon the depraved inhabitants, and derived from it a lesson
for the household of Abraham that they should <q>keep the way
of the Lord to do righteousness and justice.</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
XVIII, 19.</note> The fundamental
principle of Judaism throughout the ages has been the
teaching of the patriarch that <q>the Judge of all the earth
cannot act unjustly,</q><note place='foot'>Gen. XVIII,
25.</note> even though the varying events of
history force the problem of justice upon the attention of
Jeremiah,<note place='foot'>Jer. XII, 1.</note>
the Psalmists,<note place='foot'>Ps. LXXIII, 12.</note>
the author of the book of Job,<note place='foot'>Job X, 22 f.</note> and
the Talmudical sages.<note place='foot'>Yer. Hag. II, 1;
Elisha ben Abuyah.</note> <q>Righteousness and justice are the
foundations of Thy throne</q><note place='foot'>Ps. LXXXIX,
15.</note>&mdash;this is the sum and substance
of the religious experience of Israel. At the same time
man realizes how far from his grasp is the divine justice:
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
<q>Thy righteousness is like the mighty mountains; Thy judgments
are like the great deep.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XXXVI, 7;
see Davidson, l. c., 143 f.; J. E., art. Justice; Hamburger:
<hi rend='italic'>Realencyclopaedie</hi>, art. Gerechtigkeit;
Dillmann, l. c., 270 f.; Strauss, l. c., 596-604.
Bousset, 437 f., is misleading.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. The Master-builder of the moral world made justice the
supporting pillar of the entire creation. <q>He is The Rock,
His work is perfect, for all His ways are just; a God of faithfulness
and without iniquity, just and right is He.</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
XXXII, 4.</note> There
can be no moral world order without a retributive justice,
which leaves no infringement of right unpunished, just as no
social order can exist without laws to protect the weak and to
enforce general respect. The God of Judaism rules over mankind
as Guardian and Vindicator of justice; no wrong escapes
His scrutinizing gaze. This fundamental doctrine invested
history, of both the individual and the nation, with a moral
significance beyond that of any other religious or ethical
system.
</p>

<p>
Whatever practice or sense of justice may exist among the
rest of mankind, it is at best a glimpse of that divine righteousness
which leads us on and becomes a mighty force compelling
us, not only to avoid wrongdoing, but to combat it with all the
passion of an indignant soul and eradicate it wherever possible.
Though in our daily experience justice may be sadly
lacking, we still cling to the moral axiom that God will lead
the right to victory and will hurl iniquity into the abyss.
As the sages remark in the Midrash: <q>How could short-sighted
and short-lived man venture to assert, <q>All His ways are just,</q>
were it not for the divine revelation by which the eyes of Moses
were opened, so that he could gaze into the very depths of
life?</q><note place='foot'>Tanh., Jithro 5.</note>
That is, the idea of divine justice is revealed, not
in the world as it is, but in the world as it should be, the ideal
cosmos which lives in the spirit.
</p>

<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>

<p>
3. It cannot be denied that justice is recognized as a binding
force even by peoples on a low cultural plane, and the Deity is
generally regarded as the guardian of justice, exactly as in
Judaism. This fact is shown by the use of the oath in connection
with judicial procedure among many nations. Both
Roman jurisprudence and Greek ethics declare justice to be
the foundation of the social life. Nevertheless the Jewish
ideal of justice cannot be identified with that of the law and the
courts. The law is part of the social system of the State, by
which the relations of individuals are determined and upheld.
The maintenance of this social order, of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>status quo</foreign>, is
considered justice by the law, whatever injustice to individuals
may result. But the Jewish idea of justice is not reactionary;
it owes to the prophets its position as the dominating principle
of the world, the peculiar essence of God, and therefore the
ultimate ideal of human life. They fought for right with an
insistence which vindicated its moral significance forever, and
in scathing words of indignation which still burn in the soul
they denounced oppression wherever it appeared. The crimes
of the mighty against the weak, they held, could not be atoned
for by the outward forms of piety. Right and justice are not
simply matters for the State and the social order, but belong
to God, who defends the cause of the helpless and the homeless,
<q>who executes the judgment of the fatherless and the widow,</q>
<q>who regardeth not persons, nor taketh bribes.</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
X, 17-18.</note> Iniquity is hateful to Him; it cannot be covered up by pious acts, nor
be justified by good ends. <q>Justice is God's.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. I, 17.</note>
Thus every violation of justice, whether from sordid self-seeking or from
tender compassion, is a violation of God's cause; and every
vindication of justice, every strengthening of the power of
right in society, is a triumph of God.
</p>

<p>
4. Accordingly, the highest principle of ethics in Judaism,
the cardinal point in the government of the world, is not love,
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
but <emph>justice</emph>. Love has the tendency to undermine the right
and to effeminize society. Justice, on the other hand, develops
the moral capacity of every man; it aims not merely to avoid
wrong, but to promote and develop the right for the sake of
the perfect state of morality. True justice cannot remain a
passive onlooker when the right or liberty of any human being
is curtailed, but strains every effort to prevent violence and
oppression. It battles for the right, until it has triumphed
over every injustice. This practical conception of right can be
traced through all Jewish literature and doctrine; through
the laws of Moses, to whom is ascribed the maxim: <q>Let the
right have its way, though it bore holes through the
rock</q>,<note place='foot'>Yeb. 92 a; Yer. Sanh. I, 18 b.</note>
through the flaming words of the prophets;<note place='foot'>Amos V, 24;
Isa. I, 17, 28; XXVIII, 17; LIV, 14.</note> through the
Psalmists, who spoke such words as these: <q>Thou art not a
God who hath pleasure in wickedness; evil shall not sojourn
with Thee. The arrogant shall not stand in Thy sight;
Thou hatest all workers of iniquity.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. V, 5-6.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nor does justice stop with the prohibition of evil. The
very arm that strikes down the presumptuous transgressor
turns to lift up the meek and endow him with strength. Justice
becomes a positive power for the right; it becomes
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Zedakah</foreign>,
righteousness or true benevolence, and aims to readjust
the inequalities of life by kindness and love. It engenders
that deeper sense of justice which claims the right of the
weak to protection by the arm of the strong.
</p>

<p>
5. Hence comes the truth of Matthew Arnold's striking
summary of Israel's Law and Prophets in his <q>Literature and
Dogma,</q> as <q>The Power, not ourselves, that maketh for
righteousness.</q> Still, when we trace the development of this
central thought in the soul of the Jewish people, we find that it
arose from a peculiar mythological conception. The God of
Sinai had manifested Himself in the devastating elements of
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
nature&mdash;fire, storm, and hail; later, the prophetic genius of
Israel saw Him as a moral power who destroyed wickedness by
these very phenomena in order that right should prevail. At
first the covenant-God of Israel hurls the plagues of heaven
upon the hostile Egyptians and Canaanites, the oppressors of
His people. Afterward the great prophets speak of the Day of
JHVH which would come at the end of days, when God will
execute His judgment upon the heathen nations by pouring
forth all the terrors of nature upon them. The natural forces
of destruction are utilized by the Ruler of heaven as means of
moral purification. <q>For by fire will the Lord
contend.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. LXVI, 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
In this process the sense of right became progressively refined,
so that God was made the Defender of the cause of the
oppressed, and the holiest of duties became the protection of
the forsaken and unfortunate. Justice and right were thus
lifted out of the civil or forensic sphere into that of divine
holiness, and the struggle for the down-trodden became an
imperative duty. Judaism finds its strength in the oft-repeated
doctrine that the moral welfare of the world rests
upon justice. <q>The King's strength is that he loveth justice,</q>
says the Psalmist, and commenting upon this the Midrash
says, <q>Not might, but right forms the foundation of the world's
peace.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XCIX, 4; Tanh. Mishpatim 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. Social life, therefore, must be built upon the firm foundation
of justice, the full recognition of the rights of all individuals
and all classes. It can be based neither upon the formal
administration of law nor upon the elastic principle of love,
which too often tolerates, or even approves certain types of
injustice. Judaism has been working through the centuries
to realize the ideal of justice to all mankind; therefore the Jew
has suffered and waited for the ultimate triumph of the God of
justice. God's kingdom of justice is to be established, not in
a world to come, but in the world that now is, in the life of
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
men and nations. As the German poet has it, <q>Die Weltgeschichte
ist das Weltgericht</q> (the history of the world is the
world's tribunal of justice).
</p>

<p>
7. The recognition of God as the righteous Ruler implies a
dominion of absolute justice which allows no wrongdoing to
remain unpunished and no meritorious act to remain unrewarded.
The moral and intellectual maturity of the people,
however, must determine how they conceive retribution in the
divine judgment. Under the simple conditions of patriarchal
life, when common experience seemed to be in harmony with
the demands of divine justice, when the evil-doer seemed to
meet his fate and the worthy man to enjoy his merited prosperity,
reward and punishment could well be expressed by
the Bible in terms of national prosperity and calamity. The
prophets, impressed by the political and moral decline of
their era, announced for both Israel and the other nations a
day of judgment to come, when God will manifest Himself as
the righteous Ruler of the world. In fact, those great
preachers of righteousness announced for all time the truth of a
<emph>moral government of the world</emph>, with terror for the malefactors
and the assurance of peace and salvation for the righteous.
<q>He will judge the world with righteousness, and the peoples
with equity</q> becomes a song of joyous confidence and hope
on the lips of the Psalmist.<note place='foot'>Ps. XCVI, 13;
XCVIII, 9.</note> This final triumph of justice does
not depend, as Christian theologians assert, on the mere outward
conformity of Israel to the law.<note place='foot'>See Bousset,
l. c., 357-366; Weber, l. c., 259-279, and comp. Suk. 30 a,
where it is stated, referring to Isa. LXI, 8, that <q>good deeds can never justify
evil acts.</q></note> On the contrary, it
offers to the innocent sufferer the hope that <q>his right shall
break forth as light,</q> while <q>the wicked shall be put to silence
in darkness.</q><note place='foot'>Hosea VI, 6; Ps. XXXVII, 6;
I Sam. II, 9.</note> We must admit, indeed, that the Biblical
idea of retribution still has too much of the earthly flavor, and
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
often lacks true spirituality. The explanation of this lies in
the desire of the expounders of Judaism that <emph>this</emph> world should
be regarded as the battle-ground between the good and the
bad, that the victory of the good is to be decided <emph>here</emph>, and that
the idea of justice should not assume the character of other-worldliness.
</p>

<p>
8. It is true that neither the prophets, such as Jeremiah,
nor the sages, such as the authors of Job and Koheleth, actually
solved the great enigma which has baffled all nations and ages,
the adjustment of merit and destiny by divine righteousness.
Yet even a doubter like Job does not despair of his own sense
of justice, and wrestles with his God in the effort to obtain a
deeper insight. Still the great mass of people are not satisfied
with an unfulfilled yearning and seeking. The various religions
have gradually transferred the final adjustment of merit
and destiny to the hereafter; the rewards and punishments
awaiting man after death have been depicted glaringly in
colors taken from this earthly life. It is not surprising that
Judaism was influenced by this almost universal view. The
mechanical form of the principle of justice demands that <q>with
the same measure one metes out, it shall be meted out to
him,</q><note place='foot'>Sota I, 7-8; Tos. Sota III; Mek. Shirah 4; B. Wisdom XV, 3;
XIX, 17 Jubilees IV, 3, elsewhere, comp. Math. VII, 2, and
parallels.</note> and this could not be found either in human justice
or in human destiny. Therefore the popular mind naturally
turned to the world to come, expecting there that just retribution
which is lacking on earth.
</p>

<p>
Only superior minds could ascend to that higher ethical
conception where compensation is no longer expected, but
man seeks the good and happiness of others and finds therein
his highest satisfaction. As Ben Azzai expresses it, <q>The
reward of virtue is virtue, and the punishment of sin is
sin.</q><note place='foot'>Aboth IV, 2.</note>
At this point justice merges into divine holiness.
</p>

<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>

<p>
9. The idea of divine justice exerted its uplifting force in
one more way in Judaism. The recognition of God as the
righteous Judge of the world&mdash;<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Zidduk ha
Din</foreign><note place='foot'>See Levy, W. B.:
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Zidduk</foreign>;
comp. Ex. IX, 27; Lam. I, 18; Neh. IX, 33.</note>&mdash;is to bring
consolation and endurance to the afflicted, and to remove
from their hearts the bitter sting of despair and doubt. The
rabbis called God <q>the Righteous One of the universe,</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
R. XLIX, 19; Yoma 37 a.</note> as if
to indicate that God himself is meant by the Scriptural verse,
<q>The righteous is an everlasting foundation of the world.</q><note place='foot'>Prov.
X, 25.</note>
</p>

<p>
Far remote from Judaism, however, is the doctrine that God
would consign an otherwise righteous man to eternal doom,
because he belongs to another creed or another race than that
of the Jew. Wherever the heathens are spoken of as condemned
at the last judgment, the presumption based upon
centuries of sad experience was that their lives were full of
injustice and wickedness. Indeed, milder teachers, whose
view became the accepted one, maintained that truly righteous
men are found among the heathen, who have therefore as
much claim upon eternal salvation as the pious ones of
Israel.<note place='foot'>See Tos. Sanh. XIII, 2; Sanh. 105 a;
Yalkut Isaiah 296; Crescas: <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Or
Adonai</foreign>, III, 44.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XX. God's Love and Compassion</head>

<p>
1. As justice forms the basis of human morality, with kindness
and benevolence as milder elements to mitigate its sternness,
so, according to the Jewish view, mercy and love represent
the milder side of God, but by no means a higher
attribute counteracting His justice. Love can supplement justice,
but cannot replace it. The sages say:<note place='foot'>Gen. R.
VIII, 4-5; XII, 15; Midr. Teh. to Ps. LXXXIX, 2; comp.
Ben Sira, XVIII, 11; Testaments of XII Patr.: Zebulon 9; Ap. Baruch XLVIII,
14; IV Esdras VIII, 31; Psalms of Solomon IX, 7; Prayer of Manasseh, 8,
13.</note> <q>When the Creator
saw that man could not endure, if measured by the standard
of strict justice, He joined His attribute of mercy to that of
justice, and created man by the combined principle of both.</q>
The divine compassion with human frailty, felt by both Moses
and Hosea, manifests itself in God's mercy. Were it not for
the weakness of the flesh, justice would have sufficed. But
the divine plan of salvation demands redeeming love which
wins humanity step by step for higher moral ends. The educational
value of this love lies in the fact that it is a gift of grace,
bestowed on man by the fatherly love of God to ward off the
severity of full retribution. His pardon must conduce to a
deeper moral earnestness.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art.
<q>Love.</q> Both Weber, l. c., 57 f. and Bousset, l. c., 443 f.
show Christian bias.</note> <q>For with Thee there is forgiveness
that Thou mayest be feared.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. CXXX,
4.</note> R. Akiba says: <q>The
world is judged by the divine attribute of goodness.</q><note place='foot'>Aboth
III, 19; comp. B. Wisdom XI, 23, 26; XII, 16, 18; Ben Sira,
II, 18.</note>
</p>

<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>

<p>
2. As a matter of course, in the Biblical view God's mercy was
realized at first only with regard to Israel and was afterward
extended gradually to humanity at large. The generation of
the flood and the inhabitants of Sodom perished on account
of their guilt, and only the righteous were saved. This attitude
holds throughout the Bible until the late book of Jonah, with
its lesson of God's forgiveness even for the heathen city of
Nineveh after due repentance. In the later Psalms the divine
attributes of mercy are expanded and applied to all the creatures
of God.<note place='foot'>Ps. CXLIV, 8-9; comp.
Ben Sira, XVIII, 13.</note> According to the school of Hillel, whenever
the good and evil actions of any man are found equal in the
scales of justice, God inclines the balances toward the side of
mercy.<note place='foot'>Tos. Sanh. XIII, 3.</note>
Nay more, in the words of Samuel, the Babylonian
teacher, God judges the nations by the noblest types they
produce.<note place='foot'>Yer. R. h. Sh. I, 57 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
The ruling Sadducean priesthood insisted on the rigid
enforcement of the law. The party of the pious, the
<foreign rend='italic'>Hasidim</foreign>,
however,&mdash;according to the liturgy, the apocryphal and the
rabbinical literature,&mdash;appealed to the mercy of God in song
and prayer, acknowledging their failings in humility, and made
kindness and love their special objects in life. Therefore with
their ascendancy the divine attributes of mercy and compassion
were accentuated. God himself, we are told, was
heard praying: <q>Oh that My attribute of mercy may prevail
over My attribute of justice, so that grace alone may be
bestowed upon My children on earth.</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 7 a.</note> And the second
word of the Decalogue was so interpreted that God's mercy&mdash;which
is said to extend <q>to the thousandth generation</q>&mdash;is
five hundred times as powerful as His punitive justice,&mdash;which
is applied <q>to the third and fourth generation.</q><note place='foot'>Tos.
Sota IV, 1, with reference to Ex. XX, 5-6. The plural,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>laalafim</foreign>, is
taken to mean <emph>two thousand</emph>.</note>
</p>

<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>

<p>
3. Divine mercy shows itself in the law, where compassion
is enjoined on all suffering creatures. Profound sympathy
with the oppressed is echoed in the ancient law of the poor
who had to give up his garment as a pledge: <q>When he crieth
unto Me, I shall hear, for I am gracious.</q><note place='foot'>Ex.
XXII, 26; comp. 21, 23.</note> In the old Babylonian
code, might was the arbiter of right,<note place='foot'>See
Harper: <hi rend='italic'>Code of Hammurabi</hi>, 1900; Oettli: <hi rend='italic'>D.
Gesetz Hammurabis und d. Thora Israels</hi>, 1903; Cohn: <hi rend='italic'>D. Gesetz
Hammurabis</hi>, Zürich, 1903; Grimm: <hi rend='italic'>D. Gesetz Chammurabis und
Moses</hi>, Cologne, 1903. Also M. Jastrow,
<hi rend='italic'>Hebrew and Babylonian Traditions</hi>, p. 255-319.</note> but the unique
genius of the Jew is shown in adapting this same legal material
to its impulse of compassion. The cry of the innocent sufferer,
of the forsaken and fatherless, rises up to God's throne and
secures there his right against the oppressor. Thus in the
Mosaic law and throughout Jewish literature God calls himself
<q>the Judge of the widow,</q> <q>the Father of the
fatherless,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. X, 18; Ps. LXXIII.</note>
<q>a Stronghold to the needy.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XXV,
4.</note> He calls the poor, <q>My
people,</q><note place='foot'>Ex. XXII, 24.</note>
and, as the rabbis say, He loves the persecuted, not
the persecutors.<note place='foot'>Ex. R. XXVII, 5; Eccles. R. to III, 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. Even to dumb beasts God extends His mercy. This
Jewish tenderness is an inheritance from the shepherd life of
the patriarchs, who were eager to quench the thirst of the
animals in their care before they thought of their own
comfort.<note place='foot'>Gen. XXIV, 19.</note>
This sense of sympathy appears in the Biblical precepts
as to the overburdened beast,<note place='foot'>Ex.
XXIII, 5.</note> the ox treading the corn,<note place='foot'>Deut. XXV, 4.</note>
and the mother-beast or mother-bird with her
young,<note place='foot'>Lev. XX, 28; Deut. XXII, 6.</note> as well
as the Talmudic rule first to feed the domestic animals and
then sit down to the meal.<note place='foot'>Git.
62 a, with reference to Deut. XI, 15.</note> This has remained a characteristic
trait of Judaism. Thus, in connection with the verse of the
Psalm, <q>His tender mercies are over all His
works,</q><note place='foot'>Ps. CXLV, 9.</note> it is
related of Rabbi Judah the Saint, the redactor of the Mishnah,
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
that he was afflicted with pain for thirteen years, and gave
as reason that he once struck and kicked away a calf which
had run to him moaning for protection; he was finally relieved,
after he had taught his household to have pity even on the
smallest of creatures.<note place='foot'>B. M.
85 a; Yer. Kil. IX, 4.</note> In fact, Rabban Gamaliel, his grandfather,
had taught before him: <q>Whosoever has compassion
on his fellow-creatures, on him God will have
compassion.</q><note place='foot'>Tos. B. K. IX, 30; Sifre, Deut. 96.</note>
The sages often interpret the phrase <q>To walk in the way of
the Lord</q>&mdash;that is, <q>As the Holy One, blessed be He, is
merciful, so be ye also merciful.</q><note place='foot'>Sifre,
Deut. § 49; Shab. 133 b; comp. Philo: <hi rend='italic'>De Humanitate.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
5. Thus the rabbis came to regard <emph>love</emph> as the innermost
part of God's being. <emph>God loves mankind</emph>, is the highest stage
of consciousness of God, but this can be attained only by the
closest relation of the human soul to the Most High, after
severe trials have softened and humanized the spirit. It is not
accidental that Scripture speaks often of God's goodness,
mercy, and grace, but seldom mentions His love. Possibly
the term <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ahabah</foreign>
was used at first for sensuous love and therefore
was not employed for God so often as the more spiritual
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hesed</foreign>,
which denotes kind and loyal affection.<note place='foot'>See
Concordance to <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ahabah</foreign> and
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hesed</foreign>. Note especially Hos. VI, 6.</note>
However, Hosea used this term for his own love for his faithless wife, and
did not hesitate to apply it also to God's love for His faithless
people, which he terms <q>a love of free will.</q><note place='foot'>Hos.
III, 1; XI, 1, 4; XIV, 5.</note> His example
is followed by Jeremiah, most tender of the prophets, who gave
the classic expression to the everlasting love of God for Israel,
His beloved son.<note place='foot'>Jer. XXXI, 2,
19.</note> This divine love, spiritually understood,
forms the chief topic of the Deuteronomic addresses.<note place='foot'>Deut.
VII, 8; X, 15.</note> In this
book God's love appears as that of a father for his son, who
lavishes gifts upon him, but also chastises him for his own
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
good.<note place='foot'>Deut. VIII, 5; see Sifre, Deut.
32.</note> The mind opened more and more to regard the trials
sent by God as means of ennobling the character,<note place='foot'>Prov.
III, 13.</note> and the
men of the Talmudic period often speak of the afflictions of
the saints as <q>visitations of the divine love.</q><note place='foot'>Ber.
5 a; Sifre, l. c.; Mek. Yithro 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. The sufferings of Israel in particular were taken to be
trials of the divine love.<note place='foot'>See Mek.
and Sifre, l. c.</note> God's love for Israel, <q>His first-born
son,</q><note place='foot'>Ex. IV, 22.</note> is not partial, but from the outset aims to
train him for his world mission. The Song of Moses speaks of the
love of the Father for His son <q>whom He found in the
wilderness</q>;<note place='foot'>Deut. XXXII, 6, 10 f.</note>
and this is requited by the bridal love of Israel with
which the people <q>went after God in the wilderness.</q><note place='foot'>Jer.
II, 2.</note> It is this love of God, according to Akiba's interpretation of the
Song of Songs, which <q>all the waters could not quench,</q> <q>a
love as strong as death.</q><note place='foot'>Song of Songs, R. to III,
7. Comp. Davidson, l. c., 235-287.</note> This love raised up a nation of
martyrs without parallel in history, although the followers of
the so-called Religion of Love fail to give it the credit it
deserves and seem to regard it as a kind of hatred for the rest
of mankind.<note place='foot'>See Schreiner, l. c., 103-112; Perles:
<hi rend='italic'>Bousset</hi>, 58 f.</note> Whenever the paternal love of God is truly
felt and understood it must include all classes and all souls of
men who enter into the relation of children to God. Wherever
emphasis is laid upon the special love for Israel, it is based upon
the love with which the chosen people cling to the Torah,
the word of God, upon the devotion with which they surrender
their lives in His cause.<note place='foot'>Pesik, 16-17; Mek. Yithro 6, at end.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. Still, Judaism does not proclaim love, absolute and unrestricted,
as the divine principle of life. That is left to the
Church, whose history almost to this day records ever so many
acts of lovelessness. Love is unworthy of God, unless it is
guided by justice. Love of good must be accompanied by
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
hate of evil, or else it lacks the educative power which alone
makes it beneficial to man.
</p>

<p>
God's love manifests itself in human life as an educative
power. R. Akiba says that it extends to all created in God's
image, although the knowledge of it was vouchsafed to Israel
alone.<note place='foot'>Aboth III, 14.</note>
This universal love of God is a doctrine of the apocryphal
literature as well. <q>Thou hast mercy upon all ... for
Thou lovest all things that are, and hatest nothing which
Thou hast made.... But Thou sparest all, for they are Thine,
O Lord, Lover of souls,</q> says the Book of
Wisdom;<note place='foot'>XI, 23-26.</note> and when
Ezra the Seer laments the calamity that has befallen the people,
God replies, <q>Thinkest thou that thou lovest My creatures
more than I?</q><note place='foot'>IV Esdra VIII, 47.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. Among the mystics divine love was declared to be the
highest creative principle. They referred the words of the
Song of Songs,&mdash;<q>The midst thereof is paved with
love,</q><note place='foot'>III, 10.</note>
to the innermost palace of heaven, where stands the throne of
God.<note place='foot'>Zohar I, 44 b; II, 97 a.</note>
Among the philosophers Crescas considered love the
active cosmic principle rather than intellect, the principle of
Aristotle, because it is love which is the impulse for
creation.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Or Adonai</hi>,
I, 3, 5, and Joel: <hi rend='italic'>Crescas</hi> 36-37.</note>
This conception of divine love received a peculiarly mystic
color from Juda Abravanel, a neo-Platonist of the sixteenth
century, known as Leo Hebraeus. He says: <q>God's love
must needs unfold His perfection and beauty, and reveal itself
in His creatures, and love for these creatures must again elevate
an imperfect world to His own perfection. Thus is engendered
in man that yearning for love with which he endeavors to
emulate the divine perfection.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Dialoghi di
Amore</hi>; see Zimmels: <hi rend='italic'>Leo Hebraeus</hi>, 1886.</note> Both Crescas
and Leo Hebraeus thus gave the keynote for Spinoza's <q>Intellectual
love</q> as the cosmic principle,<note place='foot'>Ethics V, proposition XXXV.</note>
and this has been echoed even
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
in such works as Schiller's dithyrambs on <q>Love and Friendship</q>
in his <q>Philosophic Letters.</q><note place='foot'><q>The Theosophy
of Julius</q>: <q>God.</q></note> Still this neo-Platonic
view has nothing in common with the theological conception
of love. In Judaism God is conceived as a loving Father,
who purposes to lead man to happiness and salvation. In other
words, the divine love is an essentially moral attribute of God,
and not a metaphysical one.
</p>

<p>
9. If we wish to speak of a power that permeates the cosmos
and turns the wheel of life, it is far more correct to speak of
God's creative goodness.<note place='foot'><foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Middath
tobah.</foreign></note> According to Scripture, each day's
creation bears the divine approval: <q>It is good.</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
I, 4, 10, 12, 18, 21, 23, 31.</note> Even the
evil which man experiences serves a higher purpose, and that
purpose makes for the good. Misfortune and death, sorrow
and sin, in the great economy of life are all turned into final
good. Accordingly, Judaism recognizes this divine goodness
not only in every enjoyment of nature's gifts and the favors of
fortune, but also in sad and trying experiences, and for all
of these it provides special formulas of benediction.<note place='foot'>Gen.
R. IX, 5, 9; Ber. 60 a; Yer. Ber. IX, 13 c-14 b; Taan. 21 a.</note> The
same divine goodness sends joy and grief, even though shortsighted
man fails to see the majestic Sun of life which shines
in unabated splendor above the clouds. Judaism was optimistic
through all its experiences just because of this implicit
faith in God's goodness. Such faith transforms each woe into
a higher welfare, each curse into actual blessing; it leads men
and nations from oppression to ever greater freedom, from
darkness to ever brighter light, and from error to ever higher
truth and righteousness. Divine love may have pity upon
human weakness, but it is divine goodness that inspires and
quickens human energy. After all, love cannot be the dominant
principle of life. Man cannot love all the time, nor can he
love all the world; his sense of justice demands that he hate
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
wickedness and falsehood. We must apply the same criterion
to God. But, on the other hand, man can and should <emph>do good</emph>
and <emph>be good</emph> continually and to all men, even to the most unworthy.
Therefore God becomes the pattern and ideal of an
all-encompassing goodness, which is never exhausted and
never reaches an end.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXI. God's Truth and Faithfulness</head>

<p>
1. In the Hebrew language truth and faithfulness are both
derived from the same root; <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>aman</foreign>,
<q>firmness,</q> is the root idea of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>emeth</foreign>,
<q>truth,</q> and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>emunah</foreign>, <q>faithfulness.</q>
Man feels insecurity and uncertainty among the varying impressions
and emotions which affect his will; therefore he turns to the
immovable Rock of life, calls on Him as the Guardian and
Witness of truth, and feels confident that He will vindicate
every promise made in His sight. He is the God by whom
men swear&mdash;<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elohe
amen</foreign>;<note place='foot'>Isa. LXV, 16.</note> nay, who swears by Himself,
saying, <q>As true as that I live.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XXXII, 40.</note>
He is the supreme Power of life, <q>the God of faithfulness, in whom there
is no iniquity.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XXXII, 4.</note>
The heavens testify to His faithfulness; He is the trustworthy
God, whose essence is truth.<note place='foot'>Num. XXIII, 19;
Isa. XL, 8; Jer. X, 10; Ps. XXXI, 6; comp. Dillmann,
l. c. 269 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. Here, too, as with other attributes, the development of
the idea may be traced step by step. At first it refers to the
God of the covenant with Israel, who made a covenant with
the fathers and keeps it with the thousandth generation of their
descendants. He shows His mercy to those who love Him and
keep His commandments. The idea of God's faithfulness to
His covenant is thus extended gradually from the people to the
cosmos, and the heavens are called upon to witness to the faithfulness
of God throughout the realm of life. Thus in both the
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
Psalms and the liturgy God is praised as the One who is faithful
in His word as in His work.<note place='foot'>Ps. XXXVI, 6;
LXXXIX, 3, 38; CXLVI, 6; Benediction at seeing the
rainbow, Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerbook</hi>, p. 291.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. From this conception of faithfulness arose two other
ideas which exerted a powerful influence upon the whole
spiritual and intellectual life of the Jew. The God of faithfulness
created a people of faithfulness as His own, and Israel's
God of truth awakened in the nation a passion for truth unrivaled
by any other religious or philosophical system. Like
a silver stream running through a valley, the conviction runs
through the sacred writings and the liturgy that the promise
made of yore to the fathers will be fulfilled to the children. As
each past deliverance from distress was considered a verification
of the divine faithfulness, so each hope for the future was
based upon the same attribute. <q>He keepeth His faith also
to those who sleep in the dust.</q> These words of the second
of the Eighteen Benedictions clearly indicate that even the
belief in the hereafter rested upon the same fundamental
belief.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, the same conception formed the keynote
of the idea of the divine truthfulness. The primitive age knew
nothing of the laws of nature with which we have become
familiar through modern science. But the pious soul trusts
the God of faithfulness, certain that He who has created the
heaven and the earth is true to His own word, and will not
allow them to sink back into chaos. One witness to this is the
rainbow, which He has set up in the sky as a sign of His
covenant.<note place='foot'>Gen. IX, 11.</note>
The sea and the stars also have a boundary
assigned to them which they cannot transgress.<note place='foot'>Ps.
CIV, 9; Job XXXVIII, 11; Jer. XXXI, 34.</note> Thus to the
unsophisticated religious soul, with no knowledge of natural
science, the world is carried by God's <q>everlasting
arms</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XXXIII, 27.</note> and
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
His faithfulness becomes token and pledge of the immutability
of His will.
</p>

<p>
4. At this point the intellect grasps an idea of intrinsic and
indestructible truth, which has its beginning and its end in
God, the Only One. <q>The gods of the nations are all vanity
and deceit, the work of men; Israel's God is the God of truth,
the living God and everlasting King.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. X,
10, 15.</note> With this cry has
Judaism challenged the nations of the world since the Babylonian
exile. Its own adherents it charged to ponder upon the
problems of life and the nature of God, until He would appear
before them as the very essence of truth, and all heathenish
survivals would vanish as mist. God is truth, and He desires
naught but truth, therefore hypocrisy is loathsome to him,
even in the service of religion. With this underlying thought
Job, the bold but honest doubter, stands above his friends with
their affected piety. <emph>God is truth</emph>&mdash;this confession of faith,
recited each morning and evening by the Jew, gave his mind
the power to soar into the highest realms of thought, and inspired
his soul to offer life and all it holds for his faith. <q>God
is the everlasting truth, the unchangeable Being who ever
remains the same amid the fluctuations and changes of all
other things.</q> This is the fundamental principle upon which
Joseph Ibn Zaddik and Abraham Ibn Daud, the predecessors
of Maimonides, reared their entire philosophical systems,
which were Aristotelian and yet thoroughly
Jewish.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Emuna Rama</hi> 54. See Kaufmann,
l. c., 333 f., 352 f.; comp. Guttmann:
<hi rend='italic'>Religionsphilosophie des Ibn Daud</hi>, 136 f.; Albo II,
27, at the end; Maimonides: <hi rend='italic'>Yesode ha Torah</hi>, I, 3-4;
Hillel of Verona refers even to Aristotle's <q>Metaphysics.</q>
See Kaufmann, l. c., 334, note; Neumark, l. c., and Husik.,
l. c. <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Mystic lore, always so fond of the letters of the alphabet
and their hidden meanings, noted that the letters of
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Emeth</foreign>&mdash;<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>aleph</foreign>,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>mem</foreign> and
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>tav</foreign>&mdash;are the first, the middle, and the
last letters of the alphabet, and therefore concluded that God made
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
truth the beginning, the center, and the end of the world.<note place='foot'>See
Yer. Sanh. I, 18 a.</note>
Josephus also, no doubt in accordance with the same tradition,
declares that God is <q>the beginning, the center, and the end of
all things.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra Apionem</hi>, II, 22;
compare J. E., art. <q>Alpha and Omega.</q></note>
A corresponding rabbinical saying is: <q>Truth
is the seal of God.</q><note place='foot'>See Yer. Sanh. I, 18 a.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_XXII'/>
<head>Chapter XXII. God's Knowledge and Wisdom</head>

<p>
1. The attempt to enumerate the attributes of God recalls
the story related in the Talmud<note place='foot'>Ber.
33 b.</note> of a disciple who stepped up
to the reader's desk to offer prayer, and began to address the
Deity with an endless list of attributes. When his vocabulary
was almost exhausted, Rabbi Haninah interrupted him with
the question, <q>Hast thou now really finished telling the praise
of God?</q> Mortal man can never know what God really is.
As the poet-philosopher says: <q>Could I ever know Him, I
would be He.</q><note place='foot'>Jedayah ha Penini.</note>
But we want to ascertain what God is <emph>to us</emph>,
and for this very reason we cannot rest with the negative
attitude of Maimonides, who relies on the Psalmist's verse,
<q>Silence is praise to Thee.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. LXV, 2.</note>
We must obtain as clear a conception
of the Deity as we possibly can with our limited powers.
</p>

<p>
To the divine attributes already mentioned we must add
another which in a sense is the focus of them all. This is the
knowledge and wisdom of God, the omniscience which renders
Him all-knowing and all-wise. Through this all the others
come into self-consciousness. We ascribe wisdom to the man
who sets right aims for his actions and knows the means by
which to attain them, that is, who can control his power and
knowledge by his will and bend them to his purpose. In the
same manner we think of wisdom in view of the marvelous
order, design, and unity which we see in the natural and the
moral world. But this wisdom must be all-encompassing,
comprising time and eternity, directing all the forces and beings
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
of the world toward the goal of ideal perfection.<note place='foot'>Jer.
X, 12; Amos IV, 13; Job XXXVIII-XXXIX.</note> It makes no
difference where we find this lesson. The Book of Proverbs
singles out the tiny ant as an example of wondrous
forethought;<note place='foot'>Prov. VI, 6.</note>
the author of Job dwells on the working together of
the powers of earth and heaven to maintain the cosmic
life;<note place='foot'>Job XXXVIII-XXXIX.</note>
modern science, with its deeper insight into nature, enables us
to follow the interaction of the primal chemical and organic
forces, and to follow the course of evolution from star-dust and
cell to the structure of the human eye or the thought-centers
of the brain. But in all these alike our conclusion must be
that of the Psalmist: <q>O Lord, how manifold are Thy works,
in wisdom hast Thou made them all.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. CIV, 24.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. Accordingly, if we are to speak in human terms, we
may consider God's wisdom the element which determines His
various motive-powers,&mdash;omniscience, omnipotence, and
goodness,&mdash;to tend toward the realization of His cosmic plan.
Or we may call it the active intellect with which God works
as Creator, Ordainer, and Ruler of the universe. The Biblical
account of creation presupposes this wisdom, as it portrays a
logical process, working after a definite plan, proceeding from
simpler to more complex forms and culminating in man.
Biblical history likewise is based upon the principle of a divinely
prearranged plan, which is especially striking in such
stories as that of Joseph.<note place='foot'>Gen. L, 20;
see Dillmann, l. c., 280; Strauss, l. c., 575 f.; Hamburger, l. c.,
art. <q>Weisheit Gottes</q>; A. B. Davidson, l. c., 180-182.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. At first the divine wisdom was supposed to rest in part on
specially gifted persons, such as Joseph, Solomon, and Bezalel.
As Scripture has it, <q>The Lord giveth wisdom, out of His
mouth cometh knowledge and understanding.</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
XLI, 38; I Kings III, 12; Ex. XXXV, 31; Prov. II, 6.</note> Later the
obscure destiny of the nation appears as the design of an all-wise
Ruler to the great prophets and especially to Isaiah, the
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
high-soaring eagle among the seers of
Israel.<note place='foot'>Isa. XXV, 1; XXVII, 29.</note> With the progressive
expansion of the world before them, the seers and sages saw
a sublime purpose in the history of the nations, and felt more
and more the supreme place of the divine wisdom as a manifestation
of His greatness. Thus the great seer of the Exile never
tires of illumining the world-wide plan of the divine
wisdom.<note place='foot'>Isa. XL-LV.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. A new development ensued under Babylonian and
Persian influence at the time when the monotheism of Israel
became definitely universal. The divine wisdom, creative
and world-sustaining, became the highest of the divine attributes
and was partially hypostatized as an independent cosmic
power. In the twenty-eighth chapter of the Book of Job wisdom
is depicted as a magic being, far remote from all living
beings of earth, beyond the reach of the creatures of the lowest
abyss, who aided the Creator with counsel and knowledge in
measuring and weighing the foundations of the world. The
description seems to be based upon an ancient Babylonian
conception&mdash;which has parallels elsewhere&mdash;of a divine
Sybil dwelling beneath the ocean in <q>the house of wisdom.</q><note place='foot'>Prov.
IX, 1. Comp. A. Jeremias: <hi rend='italic'>D. A. Test. i. L. d. i. alt. Orients</hi>, 5,
80, 336, 367.</note>
Here, however, the mythological conception is transformed
into a symbolic figure. In the eighth chapter of Proverbs
the description of divine wisdom is more in accordance with
Jewish monotheism; wisdom is <q>the first of God's creatures,</q>
<q>a master-workman</q> who assisted Him in founding heaven
and earth, a helpmate and playmate of God, and at the same
time the instructor of men and counselor of princes, inviting all
to share her precious gifts. This conception is found also in
the apocryphal literature,&mdash;in Ben Sira, the book of Enoch,
the Apocalypse of Baruch, and the Hellenistic Book of
Wisdom.<note place='foot'>Ben Sira XXIV, 3-6, 14, 21; Enoch XLII, 1-2; Slavonic Enoch
XXX, 8; Baruch III, 9-IV, 4; comp. Bousset, l. c., 337 f.; J. E., art. Wisdom;
Bentwich: <hi rend='italic'>Philo</hi>, pp. 141-147.</note>
</p>

<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>

<p>
From this period two different currents of thought appeared.
The one represented wisdom as an independent being distinct
from God, and this finally became merged, under Platonic influence,
into the views of neo-Platonism, Gnosticism, and the
Christian dogma. The other identified the divine wisdom with
the Torah, and therefore it is the Torah which served God
as counselor and mediator at the Creation and continues as
counselor in the management of the world. This view led
back to strict monotheism, so that the cosmology of the rabbis
spoke alternately of the divine wisdom and the Torah as the
instruments of God at Creation.<note place='foot'>Targ. Ver.
to Gen. I, 1. Gen. R. I. 2, 5. See Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>,
127-137.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. The Jewish philosophers of the Middle Ages, such as
Saadia, Gabirol, and Jehuda ha Levi, followed the Mohammedan
theologians in enumerating God's wisdom among the attributes
constituting His essence, together with His omnipotence, His
will, and His creative energy. But they would not take wisdom
or any other attribute as a separate being, with an existence
outside of God, which would either condition Him or
admit a division of His nature.<note place='foot'>Kaufmann,
l. c., 16, 107, 113, 163, 325, 418.</note> <q>God himself is wisdom,</q> says
Jehuda ha Levi, referring to the words of Job: <q>He is wise in
heart.</q><note place='foot'>Job IX, 4; <hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>,
II, 2.</note> And Ibn Gabirol sings in his <q>Crown of Royalty</q>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Thou art wise, and the wisdom of Thy fount of life floweth from
Thee;</q></l>
<l>And compared with Thy wisdom man is void of understanding;</l>
<l>Thou art wise, before anything began its existence;</l>
<l>And wisdom has from times of yore been Thy fostered child;</l>
<l>Thou art wise, and out of Thy wisdom didst Thou create the world,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Life the artificer that fashioneth whatsoever delighteth
him.</q><note place='foot'>Sachs, cl, 6, 227.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXIII. God's Condescension</head>

<p>
1. An attribute of great importance for the theological
conception of God, one upon which both Biblical and rabbinical
literature laid especial stress, is His condescension and
humility. The Psalmist says<note place='foot'>Ps. XVIII,
36.</note>: <q>Thy condescension hath
made me great,</q> which is interpreted in the Midrash that
the Deity stoops to man in order to lift him up to Himself.
A familiar saying of R. Johanan is<note place='foot'>Meg. 35 a.</note>:
<q>Wherever Scripture
speaks of the greatness of God, there mention is made also
of His condescension. So when the prophet begins, <q>Thus
saith the High and Lofty One that inhabiteth eternity,
whose name is Holy: I dwell in the high and holy place,</q>
he adds the words, <q>With him also that is of a contrite and
humble spirit.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. LVII, 15.</note>
Or when the Deuteronomist says: <q>For
the Lord your God, the great God, the mighty and the awful,</q>
he concludes, <q>He doth execute justice for the fatherless and
widow, and loveth the stranger.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. X,
17-18.</note> And again the Psalmist:
<q>Extol Him that rideth upon the skies, whose name is the Lord,
a Father of the fatherless and a Judge of the widows.</q></q><note place='foot'>Ps.
LXVIII, 5-6.</note> <q>Do
you deem it unworthy of God that He should care for the
smallest and most insignificant person or thing in the world's
household?</q> asks Mendelssohn in his <hi rend='italic'>Morgenstunden</hi>. <q>It
certainly does not detract from the dignity of a king to be
seen fondling his child as a loving father,</q> and he quotes
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
the verse of the Psalm, <q>Who is like unto the Lord our God,
that is enthroned on high, that looketh down low upon heaven
and upon the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. CXIII, 5-6.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. This truth has a religious depth which no philosophy
can set forth. Only the God of Revelation is near to man
in his frailty and need, ready to hear his sighs, answer his
supplication, count his tears, and relieve his wants when his
own power fails. The philosopher must reject as futile every
attempt to bring the incomprehensible essence of the Deity
within the compass of the human understanding. The religious
consciousness, however, demands that we accentuate
precisely those attributes of God which bring Him nearest
to us. If reason alone would have the decisive voice in this
problem, every manifestation of God to man and every reaching
out of the soul to Him in prayer would be idle fancy and
self-deceit. It is true that the Biblical conception was simple
and child-like enough, representing God as descending from
the heavens to the earth. Still Judaism does not accept
the cold and distant attitude of the philosopher; it teaches
that God as a spiritual power does condescend to man, in
order that man may realize his kinship with the Most High
and rise ever nearer to his Creator. The earth whereon
man dwells and the human heart with its longing for
heaven, are not bereft of God. Wherever man seeks Him,
there He is.
</p>

<p>
3. Rabbinical Judaism is very far from the attitude assigned
to it by Christian theologians,<note place='foot'>Weber,
l. c., 154.</note> of reducing the Deity to an
empty transcendental abstraction and loosening the bond
which ties the soul to its Maker. On the contrary, it maintains
these very relations with a firmness which betokens
its soundness and its profound psychological truth. In this
spirit a Talmudic master interprets the Deuteronomic verse:
<q>For what great nation is there that hath God so nigh unto
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
them, as the Lord our God is whensoever we call upon Him?</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
IV, 7; Yer. Ber. IX, 19 a, where the plural,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Kerobim</foreign>, suggests the
idea, <q>all kinds of nearness.</q></note>
saying that <q>each will realize the nearness of God according
to his own intellectual and emotional disposition, and thus
enter into communion with Him.</q> According to another
Haggadist the verse of the Psalm, <q>The voice of the Lord
resoundeth with power,</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XXIX, 4;
Tanh. Yithro, ed. Buber, 17.</note> teaches how God reveals Himself,
not with His own overwhelming might, but according to each
man's individual power and capacity. The rabbis even make
bold to assert that whenever Israel suffers, God suffers with
him; as it is written, <q>I will be with him in trouble.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
XCI, 15; Isa. LXIII, 9; Sifre Num. 84.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. As a matter of fact, all the names which we apply to
God in speech or in prayer, even the most sublime and holy
ones, are derived from our own sensory experience and cannot
be taken literally. They are used only as vehicles to bring
home to us the idea that God's nearness is our highest good.
Even the material world, which is perceptible to our senses,
must undergo a certain inner transformation before it can be
termed science or philosophy, and becomes the possession of
the mind. It requires still further exertions of the imagination
to bring within our grasp the world of the spirit, and above
all the loftiest of all conceptions, the very being of God.
Yet it is just this Being of all Beings who draws us irresistibly
toward Himself, whose nearness we perceive in the very
depths of our intellectual and emotional life. Our <q>soul
thirsteth after God, the living God,</q> and behold, He is nigh,
He takes possession of us, and we call Him <emph>our</emph> God.
</p>

<p>
5. The Haggadists expressed this intimate relation of God
to man, and specifically to Israel, by bold and often naïve
metaphors. They ascribe to God special moments for wrath
and for prayer, a secret chamber where he weeps over the
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
distress of Israel, a prayer-mantle (tallith) and phylacteries
which He wears like any of the leaders of the community,
and even lustrations which He practices exactly like
mortals.<note place='foot'>Ber. 6 a; 7 a; R. ha Sh. 17 b; Hag. 5 b; Sanh. 39 a. Comp.
Schechter, <hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>, p. 21-50.</note>
But such fanciful and extravagant conceptions were never
taken seriously by the rabbis, and only partisan and prejudiced
writers, entirely lacking in a sense of humor, could point
to such passages to prove that a theology of the Synagogue
carried out a <q>Judaization of God.</q><note place='foot'>Weber, l. c., 157-160.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>C. God In Relation To The World</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXIV. The World and its Master</head>

<p>
1. In using the term world or <emph>universe</emph> we include the
totality of all beings at once, and this suggests a stage of
knowledge where polytheism is practically overcome. Among
the Greeks, Pythagoras is said to have been the first to perceive
<q>a beautiful order of things</q> in the world, and therefore
to call it <emph>cosmos</emph>.<note place='foot'>Plutarch: <q>De placitis
philosophiae,</q> II, 1; comp. for the entire chapter
Dillmann, l. c., 284-295; Smend: 1. c., 454 f.; H. Steinthal: <q>Die Idee der
Schöpfung</q> in J. B. z. Jued. Gesch. u. Lit., II,
39-44.</note> Primitive man saw in the world innumerable
forces continually struggling with each other for supremacy.
Without an ordering mind no order, as we conceive
it, can exist. The old Babylonian conception prevalent
throughout antiquity divided the world into three realms, the
celestial, terrestrial, and the nether world, each of which had
its own type of inhabitants and its own ruling divinities. Yet
these various divine powers were at war with each other, and
ultimately they, too, must submit to a blind fate which men
and gods alike could read in the stars or other natural phenomena.
</p>

<p>
With the first words of the Bible, <q>In the beginning
God created the heavens and the earth,</q> Judaism declared
the world to be a unity and God its Creator and Master.
Heathenism had always beheld in the world certain blind
forces of nature, working without plan or purpose and devoid
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
of any moral aims. But Judaism sees in the world the work
of a supreme Intellect who fashioned it according to His will,
and who rules in freedom, wisdom, and goodness. <q>He
spoke, and it was; He commanded, and it stood.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
XXXIII, 9.</note> Nature
exists only by the will of God; His creative
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fiat</foreign> called it into
existence, and it ceases to be as soon as it has fulfilled His
plan.
</p>

<p>
2. That which the scientist terms nature&mdash;the cosmic
life in its eternal process of growth and reproduction&mdash;is
declared by Judaism to be God's creation. Ancient heathen
conceptions deified nature, indeed, but they knew only a
cosmogony, that is, a process of birth and growth of the world.
In this the gods participate with all other beings, to sink
back again at the close of the drama into fiery chaos,&mdash;the
so-called <q>twilight of the gods.</q> Here the deity constitutes
a part of the world, or the world a part of the deity, and
philosophic speculation can at best blend the two into a
pantheistic system which has no place for a self-conscious,
creative mind and will. In fact, the universe appears as an
ever growing and unfolding deity, and the deity as an ever
growing and unfolding universe. Modern science more
properly assumes a self-imposed limitation; it searches for
the laws underlying the action and interaction of natural
forces and elements, thus to explain in a mechanistic way
the origin and development of all things, but it leaves entirely
outside of its domain the whole question of a first cause and a
supreme creative mind. It certainly can pass no opinion as to
whether or not the entire work of creation was accomplished
by the free act of a Creator. Revelation alone can speak with
unfaltering accents: <q>In the beginning God created heaven
and earth.</q> However we may understand, or imagine, the
beginning of the natural process, the formation of matter and
the inception of motion, we see above the confines of space
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
and time the everlasting God, the absolutely free Creator of
all things.
</p>

<p>
3. No definite theological dogma can define the order and
process of the genesis of the world; this is rather a scientific
than a religious question. The Biblical documents themselves
differ widely on this point, whether one compares the stories
in the first two chapters of Genesis, or contrasts both of them
with the poetical descriptions in Job and the
Psalms.<note place='foot'>Job XXXVIII; Ps. CIV.</note> And
these divergent accounts are still less to be reconciled with
the results of natural science. In the old Babylonian cosmography,
on which the Biblical view is based, the earth,
shaped like a disk, was suspended over the waters of the ocean,
while above it was the solid vault of heaven like a ceiling.
In this the stars were fixed like lamps to light the earth, and
hidden chambers to store up the rain. The sciences of astronomy,
physics, and geology have abolished these childlike
conceptions as well as the story of a six-day creation,
where vegetation sprang from the earth even before the sun,
moon, and stars appeared in the firmament.
</p>

<p>
The fact is that the Biblical account is not intended to
depreciate or supersede the facts established by natural
science, but solely to accentuate those religious truths which
the latter disregards.<note place='foot'>Comp. Albo
I, 12, and Schlesinger's Notes, 625.</note> These may be summed up in the
following three doctrines:
</p>

<p>
4. First. Nature, with all its immeasurable power and
grandeur, its wondrous beauty and harmony, is not independent,
but is the work, the workshop, and the working
force of the great Master. His spirit alone is the active power;
His will must be carried out. It is true that we cannot conceive
the universe otherwise than as infinite in time and
space, because both time and space are but human modes
of apperception. In fact, we cannot think of a Creator without
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
a creation, because any potentiality or capacity without
execution would imply imperfection in God. Nevertheless
we must conceive of God as the designing and creating intellect
of the universe, infinitely transcending its complex
mechanism, whose will is expressed involuntarily by each
of the created beings. He alone is the living God; He has
lent existence and infinite capacity to the beings of the world;
and they, in achieving their appointed purpose, according
to the poet's metaphor, <q>weave His living garment.</q> The
Psalmist also sings in the same key:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Of old Thou didst lay the foundations of the earth;</q></l>
<l>And the heavens are the work of Thy hands;</l>
<l>They shall perish, but Thou shalt endure;</l>
<l>Yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment.</l>
<l>As a vesture shalt Thou change them, and they shall pass away;</l>
<l><q rend='post'>But Thou art the selfsame, and Thy years shall have no
end.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. CII, 25-27.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
5. Second. The numberless beings and forces of the universe
comprise a unity, working according to one plan, subserving
a common purpose, and pursuing in their development and
interaction the aim which God's wisdom assigned them from
the beginning. However hostile the various elements may
be toward each other, however fierce the universal conflict,
<q>the struggle for existence,</q> still over all the discord prevails
a higher concord, and the struggle of nature's forces ends in
harmony and peace. <q>He maketh peace in His high
places.</q><note place='foot'>Job XXV, 2.</note>
Even the highest type of heathenism, the Persian, divided
the world into mutually hostile principles, light and darkness,
good and evil. But Judaism proclaims God as the Creator
of both. No force is left out of the universal plan; each
contributes its part to the whole. Consequently the very
progress of natural science confirms more and more the principle
of the divine Unity. The researches of science are ever
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
tending toward the knowledge of universal laws of growth,
culminating in a scheme of universal evolution. Hence this
supports and confirms Jewish monotheism, which knows no
power of evil antagonistic to God.
</p>

<p>
6. Third. The world is good, since goodness is its creator
and its final aim. True enough, nature, bent with <q>tooth
and claw</q> upon annihilating one or another form of existence,
is quite indifferent to man's sense of compassion and justice.
Yet in the wise, though inscrutable plan of God she does
but serve the good. We see how the lower forms of life ever
serve the higher, how the mineral provides food for the vegetable,
while the animal derives its food from the vegetable
world and from lower types of animals. Thus each becomes
a means of vitality for a higher species. So by the continuous
upward striving of man the lower passions, with their evil
tendencies, work more and more toward the triumph of the
good. Man unfolds his God-likeness; he strives to
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Move upward, working out the beast,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>And let the ape and tiger die.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
7. The Biblical story of Creation expresses the perfect
harmony between God's purpose and His work in the words,
<q>And behold, it was good</q> spoken at the end of each day's
Creation, and <q>behold, it was very good</q> at the completion of
the whole. A world created by God must serve the highest
good, while, on the contrary, a world without God would prove
to be <q>the worst of all possible worlds,</q> as Schopenhauer, the
philosopher of pessimism, quite correctly concludes from his
premises. The world-view of Judaism, which regards the
entire economy of life as the realization of the all-encompassing
plan of an all-wise Creator, is accordingly an energizing optimism,
or, more precisely, meliorism. This view is voiced
by the rabbis in many significant utterances, such as the
maxim of R. Akiba, <q>Whatsoever the Merciful One does,
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
is for the good,</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 60 b.</note> or that of his teacher, Nahum
of Gimzo, <q>This, too, is for the good.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Gam
su le tobah</hi>, an allusion to his own name. Taan. 21 b.</note> His disciple, R. Meir,
inferred from the Biblical verse, <q>God saw all that He had made, and
behold, it was very good,</q> that <q>death, too, is good.</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
R. IX, 5.</note> Others
considered that suffering and even sin are included in this
verse, because every apparent evil is necessary that we may
struggle and overcome it for the final victory of the
good.<note place='foot'>Gen. R. IX, 9-10.</note>
As an ancient Midrash says: <q>God is called a God of faith
and faithfulness, because it was His faith in the world that
caused Him to bring it into existence.</q><note place='foot'>Sifre Deut. 307.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_XXV'/>
<head>Chapter XXV. Creation As the Act of God</head>

<p>
1. <q>Thus shall ye say unto them: The gods that have
not made the heavens and the earth, these shall perish from
the earth, and from under the heavens. He that hath made
the earth by His power, that hath established the world by
His wisdom, and hath stretched out the heavens by His understanding ... the
Lord God is the true God.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. X,
11-12 and 10.</note> With this declaration
of war against heathenism, the prophet drew the line,
once for all, between the uncreated, transcendent God and
the created, perishable universe. It is true that Plato spoke
of primordial and eternal matter and Aristotle of an eternally
rotating celestial sphere, and that even Biblical exegetes,
such as Ibn Ezra,<note place='foot'>See his commentary to Gen.
I, 1; comp. Neumark, l. c., I, 70, 71, 80 f., 87,
412, 439, 515; Husik, l. c., p. 190; D. Strauss, l. c.,
619-660.</note> inferred from the Creation story the existence
of primeval chaotic matter. Yet, on the whole, the
Jewish idea of God has demanded the assumption that even
this primitive matter was created by God, or, as most thinkers
have phrased it, that God created the world <emph>out of nothing</emph>.
This doctrine was voiced as early as the Maccabean period
in the appeal made by the heroic mother to the youngest
of her seven sons.<note place='foot'>II Macc. VII, 28.</note>
In the same spirit R. Gamaliel II scornfully
rejects the suggestion of a heretic that God used primeval
substances already extant in creating the world.<note place='foot'>Gen.
R. I, 12; X. 3; Hag. II b-13 a; Slavonic Enoch, XXV; see J. E.,
art. Cosmogony and Creation; Enc. Rel. and Eth., 151 ff., 167 f.</note>
</p>

<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>

<p>
2. Of course, thinking people will ever be confronted by
the problem how a transcendental God could call into existence
a world of matter, creating it within the limits of space and
time, without Himself becoming involved in the process. It
would seem that He must by the very act subject Himself
to the limitations and mutations of the universe. Hence
some of the ancient Jewish teachers came under the influence
of Babylonian and Egyptian cosmogonies in their later Hellenistic
forms, and resorted to the theory of intermediary
forces. Some of these adopted the Pythagorean conception
of the mysterious power of letters and numbers, which they
communicated to the initiated as secret lore, with the result
that the suspicion of heresy rested largely upon <q>those who
knew,</q> the so-called Gnostics.
</p>

<p>
The difficulty of assuming a creation at a fixed period of
time was met in many different ways. It is interesting to
note that R. Abbahu of Cæsarea in the fourth century offered
the explanation: <q>God caused one world after another to
enter into existence, until He produced the one of which He
said: <q>Behold, this is good.</q></q><note place='foot'>Gen.
R. IX, 1.</note> Still this opinion seems to
have been expressed by even earlier sages, as it is adopted by
Origen, a Church father of the third century, who admitted
his great debt to Jewish teachers.<note place='foot'>See Strauss, l. c., 645 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
The medieval Jewish philosophers evaded the difficulty
by the Aristotelian expedient of connecting the concept of
time with the motion of the spheres. Thus time was created
with the celestial world, and timelessness remained an attribute
of the uncreated God.<note place='foot'>See Schmiedl, l. c., 91-128;
Kaufmann, l. c., 280 f., 306, 387 f.</note> Such attempts at harmonization
prove the one point of importance to us,&mdash;which, indeed,
was frankly stated by Maimonides,&mdash;that we cannot accept
literally the Biblical account of the creation.
</p>

<p>
The modern world has been lifted bodily out of the
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
Babylonian and so-called Ptolemaic world, with its narrow
horizon, through the labors of such men as Copernicus, Galileo,
Newton, Lyall, and Darwin. We live in a world immeasurable
in terms of either space or time, a world where evolution works
through eons of time and an infinite number of stages. Such
a world gives rise to concepts of the working of God in nature
totally different from those of the seers and sages of former
generations, ideas of which those thinkers could not even
dream. To the mind of the modern scientist the entire cosmic
life, extending over countless millions of years, forming
starry worlds without end, is moved by energy arising within.
It is a continuous flow of existence, a process of formation
and re-formation, which can have no beginning and no end.
How is this evolutionist view to be reconciled with the belief
in a divine act of creation? This is the problem which modern
theology has set itself, perhaps the greatest which it must solve.
</p>

<p>
Ultimately, however, the problem is no more difficult now
than it was to the first man who pondered over the beginnings
of life in the childhood of the world. The same answer fits
both modes of thought, with only a different process of reasoning.
Whether we count the world's creation by days or by
millions of years, the truth of the first verse of Genesis remains:
<q>In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.</q>
In our theories the whole complicated world-process is but
the working out of simple laws. This leads back as swiftly
and far more surely than did the primitive cosmology to
an omnipotent and omniscient creative Power, defining at the
very outset the aim of the stupendous whole, and carrying its
comprehensive plan into reality, step by step. We who are
the products of time cannot help applying the relation of time
to the work of the Creator; time is so interwoven with our
being that a modern evolutionist, Bergson, considers it the
fundamental element of reality. Thus it is natural that we
should think of God as setting the first atoms and forces of
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
the universe into motion somewhere and somehow, at a given
moment. Through this act, we imagine, the order prevailing
through an infinitude of space and time was established
for the great fabric of life. To earlier thinkers such an act
of a supermundane and immutable God appeared as a single
act. The idea of prime importance in all this is the free
activity of the Creator in contradistinction to the blind
necessity of nature, the underlying theory of all pagan or unreligious
philosophy.<note place='foot'>See C. Seligman, <hi rend='italic'>Judenthum
und Moderne Weltanchauung</hi>.</note> The world of God, which is the world
of morality, and which leads to man, the image of God, must
be based upon the free, purposive creative act of God.
Whether such an act was performed once for all or is everlastingly
renewed, is a quite secondary matter for religion,
however important it may be to philosophy, or however
fundamental to science. In our daily morning prayers,
which refer to the daily awakening to a life seemingly new,
God is proclaimed as <q>He who reneweth daily the work of
creation.</q><note place='foot'>The first benediction before the Shema.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXVI. The Maintenance and Government of the World</head>

<p>
1. For our religious consciousness the doctrine of divine
maintenance and government of the world is far more important
than that of creation. It opposes the view of deism
that God withdrew from His creation, indifferent to the
destiny of His creatures. He is rather the ever-present Mind
and Will in all the events of life. The world which He created
is maintained by Him in its continuous activity, the object
of His incessant care.
</p>

<p>
2. Scripture knows nothing of natural law, but presents
the changing phenomena of nature as special acts of God
and considers the natural forces His messengers carrying
out His will. <q>He opens the windows of heaven to let the
rain descend upon the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
VII, 11; VIII, 2.</note> <q>He leads out the hosts
of the stars according to their number and calleth them by
name.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XL, 26.</note>
He makes the sun rise and set. <q>He says to the
snow: Fall to the earth!</q><note place='foot'>Job XXXVI,
6.</note> and calls to the wind to blow
and to the lightning to flash.<note place='foot'>Job
XXXVIII, 25.</note> He causes the produce of the
earth and the drought which destroys them. <q>He opens the
womb to make beasts and men bring forth their young;</q>
<q>He shuts up the womb to make them barren.</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
XX, 17-18; XXX, 22.</note> <q>He also
provides the food for all His creatures in due season, even
for the young ravens when they cry.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
CXLVII, 8-9.</note> His breath keeps all
alive. <q>He withdraweth their breath, and they perish, and
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
return to their dust. He sendeth forth His spirit, they are
created; He reneweth the face of the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
CIV, 27-30.</note> We are told
also that God assigns to each being its functions, telling the
earth to bring forth fruit,<note place='foot'>Gen. I,
11.</note> the sea not to trespass its boundary,<note place='foot'>Ps. CIV, 8.</note>
the stars and the seas to maintain their order.<note place='foot'>Gen.
VIII, 22; Job XXXVIII, 33.</note> To each
one He hath set a measure, a law which they dare not transgress.
God's wisdom works in them; they all are subject
to His rule.
</p>

<p>
3. This conclusion betokens an obvious improvement
upon the earlier and more childlike view. It recognizes that
there is an order in the universe and all under divine supervision.
Thus Jeremiah speaks of a covenant of God with
heaven and earth, and of the laws which they must
obey,<note place='foot'>Jer. XXXI, 39; XXXIII, 25.</note>
and in Genesis the rainbow is represented as a sign of the
covenant of peace made by God with the whole
earth.<note place='foot'>Gen. IX, 12 f.</note> As
God <q>maketh peace in the heavens above,</q><note place='foot'>Job XXV, 2.</note> He
establishes order in the world. As the various powers of nature are invested
with a degree of independence, God's sovereignty
manifests itself in the regularity with which they interact
and coöperate.<note place='foot'>See Dillmann, l. c.,
295 f.; D. Strauss, l. c., 629-643.</note> The lore of the mystics speaks even of an
oath which God administered upon His holy Name to the
heavens and the stars, the sea and the abyss, that they should
never break their designated bounds or disturb the whole
order of creation.<note place='foot'>Enoch LXIX, 15-25;
Prayer of Manasseh, 3; Suk. 53 a b; Hag. 12 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. Further progress is noted in the liturgy, in such expressions
as that <q>God reneweth daily the work of creation,</q>
or <q>He openeth every morning the gate of heaven to let the
sun come out of its chambers in all its splendor</q> and <q>at
eventide He maketh it return through the portals of the west.</q>
Again, <q>He reneweth His creative power in every phenomenon
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
of nature and in every turn of the season;</q> <q>He provideth
every living being with its sustenance.</q><note place='foot'>See
Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerbook</hi>, 37, 96, 290, 292.</note> Indeed, in the view
of Judaism the maintenance of the entire household of nature
is one continuous act of God which can neither be interrupted
nor limited in time. God in His infinite wisdom works forever
through the same laws which were in force at the beginning,
and which shall continue through all the realms of time
and space.
</p>

<p>
We feeble mortals, of course, see but <q>the hem of His garment</q>
and hear only <q>a whisper of His voice.</q> Still from
the deeper promptings of our soul we learn that science does
not touch the inmost essence of the world when it finds a
law of necessity in the realm of nature. The universe is
maintained and governed by a moral order. Moral objects
are attained by the forces of the elements, <q>the messengers
of God who fulfilled His word.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
CIII, 20.</note> Both the hosts of heaven
and the creatures of the earth do His bidding; their every
act, great or small, is as He has ordered. Yet of them all
man alone is made in God's image, and can work self-consciously
and freely for a moral purpose. Indeed, as the rabbis
express it, he has been called as <q>the co-worker with God
in the work of creation.</q><note place='foot'>Shab. 119 b.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. The conception of a world-order also had to undergo
a long development. The theory of pagan antiquity, echoed
in both Biblical and post-Biblical writings, is that the world
is definitely limited, with both a beginning and an end. As
heaven and earth came into being, so they will wax old and
shrink like a garment, while sun, moon, and stars will lose
their brightness and fall back into the primal
chaos.<note place='foot'>Ps. CII, 27; Isa. XXXIV, 4.</note> The
belief in a cataclysmic ending of the world is a logical corollary
of the belief in the birth of the world. In striking contrast,
the prophets hold forth the hope of a future regeneration of
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
the world. God will create <q>a new heaven and a new earth</q>
where all things will arise in new strength and
beauty.<note place='foot'>Isa. LXV, 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
This hope, as all eschatology, was primarily related to
the regeneration of the Jewish people. Accordingly, the
rabbis speak of two worlds,<note place='foot'>See J. E. and Enc. of
Rel. and Eth., art. <q>Eschatology</q>; Schuerer, <hi rend='italic'>G. V. I.</hi>
II, 545.</note> this world and the world to come.
They consider the present life only a preliminary of the world
to come, in which the divine plan of creation is to be worked
out for all humanity through the truths emanating from Israel.
This whole conception rested upon a science now superseded,
the geocentric view of the universe, which made the earth
and especially man the final object of creation. For us only
a figurative meaning adheres to the two worlds of the medieval
belief, following each other after the lapse of a fixed period
of time. On the one hand, we see one infinite fabric of life
in this visible world with its millions of suns and planets,
among which our earth is only an insignificant speck in the
sky. With our limited understanding we endeavor to penetrate
more and more into the eternal laws of this illimitable
cosmos. On the other hand, we hold that there is a moral
and spiritual world which comprises the divine ideals and
eternal objects of life. Both are reflected in the mind of man,
who enters into the one by his intellect and into the other by
his emotions of yearning and awe. At the same time both
are the manifestation of God, the Creator and Ruler of all.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_XXVII'/>
<head>Chapter XXVII. Miracles and the Cosmic Order</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>1. <q rend='pre'>Who is like unto Thee, O Lord, among the mighty?</q></l>
<l>Who is like unto Thee, glorious in holiness,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Fearful in praises, doing wonders!</q><note place='foot'>Ex.
XV, 11.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Thus sang Israel at the Red Sea in words which are constantly
reëchoed in our liturgy. Nothing impresses the religious
sense of man so much as unusual phenomena in nature, which
seem to interrupt the wonted course of events and thus to
reveal the workings of a higher Power. A miracle&mdash;that
is, a thing <q>wondered</q> at, because not understood&mdash;is
always regarded by Scripture as a
<q>sign</q><note place='foot'><foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Oth</foreign>,
sign for miracle, Ex. IV, 8, 17, and elsewhere.</note> or
<q>proof</q><note place='foot'><foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Mopheth</foreign>,
Ex. VII, 3, and elsewhere.</note>
of the power of God, to whom nothing is impossible. The
child-like mind of the past knew nothing of fixed or immutable
laws of nature. Therefore the question is put in all
simplicity: <q>Is anything too hard for the Lord?</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
XVIII, 14.</note> <q>Is the Lord's hand waxed short?</q><note place='foot'>Num.
XI, 23.</note> <q>Or should He who created
heaven and earth not be able to create something which
never was before?</q><note place='foot'>Ex. XXXIV, 10; Num. XVI, 30.</note>
Should <q>He who maketh a man's mouth, or makes him deaf, dumb, seeing or
blind,</q><note place='foot'>Ex. IV, 11.</note> not be
able also to open the mouth of the dumb beast or the eyes
of the blind? Should not He who killeth and giveth life
have the power also to call the dead back to life, if He sees
fit? Should not He who openeth the womb for every birth,
be able to open it for her who is ninety years old? Or when a
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
whole land is wicked, to shut the wombs of all its inhabitants
that they may remain barren? Again, should not He who
makes the sun come forth every morning from the gates of
the East and enter each night the portals of the West, not
be able to change this order once, and cause it to stand still in
the midst of its course?<note place='foot'>Josh. X, 12-14. See Joel:
<q>D. Mosaismus u. d. Wunder,</q> in Jb. d. Jued.
Gesch. u. Lit., 1904, p. 66-94.</note>
</p>

<p>
So long as natural phenomena are considered to be separate
acts of the divine will, an unusual event is merely an
extraordinary manifestation of this same power, <q>the finger
of God.</q> The people of Biblical times never questioned
whether a miracle happened or could happen. Their concern
was to see it as the work of the arm of God either for His
faithful ones or against His adversaries.
</p>

<p>
2. With the advance of thought, miracles began to be
regarded as interruptions of an established order of creation.
The question then arose, why the all-knowing Creator should
allow deviations from His own laws. As the future was
present to Him at the outset, why did He not make provision
in advance for such special cases as He foresaw? This was
exactly the remedy which the rabbis furnished. They declared
that at Creation God provided for certain extraordinary
events, so that a latent force, established for the purpose
at the beginning of the world, is responsible for incidents
which appeared at the time to be true interferences with the
world order. Thus God had made a special covenant, as it
were, with the work of creation that at the appointed time
the Red Sea should divide before Israel; that sun and moon
should stand still at the bidding of Joshua; that fire should
not consume the three youths, Hananel, Mishael, and Azariah;
that the sea-monster should spit forth Jonah alive;
together with other so-called miracles.<note place='foot'>Mek.
Beshallah 3; Gen. R. V, 4.</note> The same idea
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
occasioned the other Haggadic saying that shortly before
the completion of the creation on the evening of the sixth day
God placed certain miraculous forces in nature. Through
them the earth opened to swallow Korah and his band, the
rock in the wilderness gave water for the thirsty multitude,
and Balaam's ass spoke like a human being; through them
also the rainbow appeared after the flood, the manna rained
from heaven, Aaron's rod burst forth with almond blossoms
and fruit, and other wondrous events happened in their
proper time.<note place='foot'>Aboth V, 6; comp. Ab. d. R. N.,
ed. Schechter, 95; Mek. Beshallah, 5;
Sifre Debarim, 355; Pes. 54 a; P. d. R. Eli., XIX; Targ. Y. to Num. XXII,
28, where a different list of ten wondrous things is given.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. Neither the rabbis nor the medieval Jewish thinkers
expressed any doubt of the credibility of the Biblical miracles.
The latter, indeed, rationalized miracles as well as other things,
and considered some of them imaginary. Saadia accepts all
the Biblical miracles except the speaking serpent in Paradise
and the speaking ass of Balaam, considering these to be
parables rather than actual occurrences.<note place='foot'>Emunoth
we Deoth II, 44, 68. Comp. Ibn Ezra to Gen. III, 1, and Num.
XXII, 28.</note> In general, both
Jewish and Mohammedan theologians assumed that special
forces hidden in nature were utilized by the prophets and
saints to testify to their divine mission. These powers were
attained by their lofty intellects, which lifted them up to
the sphere of the Supreme Intellect. All medieval attempts
to solve the problem of miracles were based upon this curious
combination of Aristotelian cosmology and Mohammedan
or Jewish theology.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>,
II, 25, 35, 37; III, 24; <hi rend='italic'>Yesode ha Torah</hi>, VII, 7; VIII, 1-3. Comp.
Joel: <hi rend='italic'>Moses Maimonides</hi>, p. 77.</note>
True, Maimonides rejects a number
of miracles as contrary to natural law, and refers to the
rabbinical saying that some of the miraculous events narrated
in Scripture were so only in appearance. Still he claims for
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
Moses, as the Mohammedans did for Mohammed, miraculous
powers derived from the sphere of the Supreme Intellect.
In a lengthy chapter on miracles Albo follows
Maimonides,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ikkarim</hi>, I, 18.</note>
while his teacher Crescas considers the Biblical miracles to
be direct manifestations of the creative activity of
God.<note place='foot'>Or <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Adonai</foreign>,
III, 5; comp. Joel: <hi rend='italic'>Don Chasdai Crescas</hi>, p. 70.</note>
Gersonides has really two opinions; in his commentary he
reduces all miracles to natural processes, but in his philosophical
work he adopts the view of Maimonides.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Milhamoth
Adonai</hi>, last chapters; comp. J. E., art. Levi ben Gershom.</note> Jehuda
ha Levi alone insisted on the miracles of the Bible as historic
evidence of the divine calling of the
prophets.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>, II, 54.</note> To all the
rest, the miracle is not performed by God but by the divinely
endowed man. God himself is no longer conceived of as changing
the cosmic order. Both He and the world created by His
will remain ever the same. Still, according to this theory,
certain privileged men are endowed with special powers by
the Supreme Intellect, and by these they can perform miracles.
</p>

<p>
4. It is evident that in all this the problem of miracles is
not solved, nor even correctly stated. Both rabbinical literature
and the Bible abound with miracles about certain holy
places and holy persons, which they never venture to doubt.
But the rabbis were not miracle-workers like the Essenes and
their Christian successors.<note place='foot'>The
<foreign rend='italic'>Anshe maaseh</foreign>, mentioned together with the
<foreign rend='italic'>Hasidim</foreign> in Suk. V, 4,
and Sot. IX, 15, are wonderworkers, of whom Haninah ben Dosa, the last, is
singled out. The same epithet was given to Simeon ben Yochai in Aramaic,
<foreign rend='italic'>Iskan</foreign>, see Lev. Rabba XXII, 2, and to R.
Assi, eod. XIX, 1,&mdash;where it
means, worker in nature's realm. Thus Nahum of Gimzo is called <q>trained
in the skill to perform miracles</q>&mdash;Taan. 21 a; Phinehas ben Jair was also a
wonderworker&mdash;Hul. 7 a. The whole portion regarding rain-miracles seems
to be taken from a work on the miracles of saints.</note> On the contrary, they sought to
repress the popular credulity and hunger for the miraculous,
saying: <q>The present generation is not worthy to have miracles
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
performed for them, like the former ones;</q><note place='foot'>Taan, 18 b.</note> or
<q>The providing of each living soul with its daily food, or the recovery
of men from a severe disease is as great a miracle as any of
those told in Scripture;</q><note place='foot'>Pes. 118 a; Ned. 41
a.</note> or again, <q>Of how small account is a person
for whom the cosmic order must be disturbed!</q><note place='foot'>Shab. 53 b.</note>
Thus when the wise men of Rome asked the Jewish sages:
<q>If your God is omnipotent, as you claim, why does He not
banish from the world the idols, which are so loathsome to
Him?</q> they replied: <q>Do you really desire God to destroy
the sun, moon, and stars, because fools worship them? The
world continues its regular course, and idolaters will not go
unpunished.</q><note place='foot'>Ab. Za. IV, 7; comp. Ber. 4 a, 20 a; Sanh. 97 b.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. In Judaism neither Biblical nor rabbinical miracles are
to be accepted as proof of a doctrinal or practical teaching.<note place='foot'>B. M.
59 b.</note> The Deuteronomic law expressly states that false prophets
can perform miracles by which they mislead the multitude.<note place='foot'>Deut. XIII,
2-6.</note> We can therefore ascribe no intrinsic religious importance to
miracles. The fact is that miracles occur only among people
who are ignorant of natural law and thus predisposed to accept
marvels. They are the products of human imagination and
credulity. They have only a subjective, not an objective
value. They are psychological, not physical facts.
</p>

<p>
The attitude of Maimonides and Albo toward Biblical
miracles is especially significant. The former declares in
his great Code:<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Yesode ha Torah</hi>, VIII,
1-5.</note> <q>Israel's belief in Moses and his law did
not rest on miracles, for miracles rather create doubt in the
mind of the believer. Faith must rest on its intrinsic truth,
and this can never be subverted by miracles, which may be
of a deceitful nature.</q> Albo devotes a lengthy chapter to
developing this idea still further, undoubtedly referring to
the Church; he speaks of miracles wrought by both Biblical
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
and Talmudic heroes, such as Onias the rain-maker, Nicodemus
ben Gorion, Hanina ben Dosa, and Phinehas ben Jair,
the popular saints.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ikkarim</hi>,
I, 18.</note> In modern times Mendelssohn, when
challenged by the Lutheran pastor Lavater either to accept
the Christian faith or refute it, attacked especially the basic
Christian faith in miracles. He stated boldly that <q>miracles
prove nothing, since every religion bases its claims on them
and consequently the truth of one would disprove the convincing
proof of the other.</q><note place='foot'>Mendelssohn: G.
Sch., III, 65, 120 f., 320 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. Our entire modern mode of thinking demands the
complete recognition of the empire of law throughout the
universe, manifesting the all-permeating will of God. The
whole cosmic order is <emph>one</emph> miracle. No room is left for single
or exceptional miracles. Only a primitive age could think
of God as altering the order of nature which He had fixed,
so as to let iron float on water like wood to please one person
here,<note place='foot'>II Kings VI, 6.</note>
or to stop sun, star, or sea in their courses in order to
help or harm mankind there.<note place='foot'>Joshua
X, 13.</note> It is more important for us
to inquire into the law of the mind by which the fact itself may
differ from the peculiar form given it by a narrator. With
our historical methods unknown to former ages, we cannot
accept any story of a miracle without seeking its intrinsic
historical accuracy. After all, the miracle as narrated is
but a human conception of what, under God's guidance,
really happened.
</p>

<p>
Accordingly, we must leave the final interpretation of the
Biblical narratives to the individual, to consider them as
historical facts or as figurative presentations of religious
ideas. Even now some people will prefer to believe that the
Ten Commandments emanated from God Himself in audible
tones, as medieval thinkers maintained.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>,
II, 33.</note> Some will adopt
the old semi-rationalistic explanation that He created a voice
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
for this special purpose. Others will hold it more worthy
of God to communicate directly with man, from spirit to
spirit, without the use of sensory means; these will therefore
take the Biblical description as figurative or mythical. In
fact, he who does not cling to the letter of the Scripture will
probably regard all the miracles as poetical views of divine
Providence, as child-like imagery expressing the ancient
view of the eternal goodness and wisdom of God. To us
also God is <q>a Doer of wonders,</q> but we experience His wonderworking
powers in ourselves. We see wonders in the acts
of human freedom which rises superior to the blind forces of
nature. The true miracle consists in the divine power within
man which aids him to accomplish all that is great and good.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXVIII. Providence and the Moral Government of the World</head>

<p>
1. None of the precious truths of Judaism has become more
indispensable than the belief in divine Providence, which we
see about us in ever new and striking forms. Man would
succumb from fear alone, beholding the dangers about him on
every side, were he not sustained by a conviction that there
is an all-wise Power who rules the world for a sublime purpose.
We know that even in direst distress we are guided by a divine
hand that directs everything finally toward the good.
Wherever we are, we are protected by God, who watches over
the destinies of man as <q>does the eagle who hovers over her
young and bears them aloft on her pinions.</q> Each of us is
assigned his place in the all-encompassing plan. Such knowledge
and such faith as this comprise the greatest comfort and
joy which the Jewish religion offers. Both the narratives and
the doctrines of Scripture are filled with this idea of Providence
working in the history of individuals and nations.<note place='foot'>The Hebrew
term <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hashgaha</foreign>&mdash;Providence&mdash;is
derived from Ps. XXXIII, 14, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hishgiah</foreign>,
<q>He observes.</q> See J. E., art. Providence; Davidson, l. c., 178-182;
Hamburger, R. W. B. II, art. Bestimmung; Rauwenhoff, l. c., 538 f.;
Ludwig Philippson: <q><hi rend='italic'>Israel. Religionsl.</hi>,</q>
II, 98 f.; Formstecher: <q><hi rend='italic'>Religion
des Geistes</hi>,</q> 114-119.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. Providence implies first, <emph>provision</emph>, and second,
<emph>predestination</emph>
in accordance with the divine plan for the government
of the world. As God's dominion over the visible world appears
in the eternal order of the cosmos, so in the moral
world, where action arises from freely chosen aims, God is
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
Ruler of a moral government. Thus He directs all the acts
of men toward the end which He has set. Judaism is most
sharply contrasted with heathenism at this point. Heathenism
either deifies nature or merges the deity into nature.
Thus there is no place for a God who knows all things and
provides for all in advance. Blind fate rules all the forces of
life, including the deities themselves. Therefore chance incidents
in nature or the positions of the stars are taken as
indications of destiny. Hence the belief in oracles and divination,
in the observation of flying arrows and floating clouds,
of the color and shape of the liver of sacrificial animals, and
other signs of heaven and earth which were to hint at the
future.<note place='foot'>Jer. X, 2. See art. Divination,
in J. E.; Dict. Bible; Enc. R. and Eth.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, Judaism sees in all things, not the fortuitous
dealings of a blind and relentless fate, but the dispensations
of a wise and benign Providence. It knows of no
event which is not foreordained by God. It sanctioned the
decision by lot<note place='foot'>See Lev. XVI, 8 f.; Num. XXVI, 56; Josh. XVIII-XIX;
Prov. XVIII, 18.</note> and the appeal to the oracle (the Urim and
Thummim)<note place='foot'>Ex. XVIII, 30; I Sam. see LXX;
XIV, 41.</note> only temporarily, during the Biblical period.
But soon it recognized entirely the will of God as the Ruler
of destiny, and the people accepted the belief that <q>the days,</q>
<q>the destinies,</q> and even <q>the tears</q> of man are all written
in His <q>book.</q><note place='foot'>Ex. XXXIII, 32; Ps. LVI, 9; CXXXIX, 16; comp.,
however, the Babylonian <q>tables of destinies.</q></note>
Thus they perceived God as <q>He who knows
from the beginning what will be at the
end.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XL, 21; XLI, 4, 22 f.; Amos III, 7.</note> The prophets,
His messengers, could thus foretell His will. They perceive
Him as the One who <q>created the smith that brought forth
the weapon for its work, and created the master who uses it
for destruction.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. LIV, 16.</note>
However the foe may rage, he is but
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
<q>the scourge in the hand of God,</q> like <q>the axe in the
hand of him who fells the tree.</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
X, 5, 15.</note> No device of men or
nations can withstand His will, for He turns all their doings
to some good purpose and transforms every curse into a
blessing.<note place='foot'>Isa. VIII. 11; Ps. II, 2 f.; Deut. XXIII, 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. Naturally this truth was first accepted in limited form,
in the life of certain individuals. The history of Joseph and
of King David were used as illustrations to show how God
protects His own. The experiences of the people confirmed
this belief and expanded it to apply to the nation. The
wanderings of Israel through the wilderness and its entrance
to the promised land were regarded as God's work for His
chosen people. The prophets looked still further and saw
the destinies of all nations, entering the foreground of history
one by one, as the sign of divine Providence, so that finally
the entire history of mankind became a great plan of divine
salvation, centered upon the truth intrusted to Israel.
</p>

<p>
Beside this conception of <emph>general</emph> Providence ruling in history,
the idea of <emph>special</emph> Providence arose in response to human
longing. The belief in Providence developed to a full conception
of care for the world at large and for each individual
in his peculiar destiny, a conviction that divine Providence
is concerned with the welfare of each individual, and that the
joyous or bitter lot of each man forms a link in the moral
government of the world. The first clear statement of this
comes from the prophet Jeremiah in his wrestling and sighing:
<q>I know, O Lord, that the way of man is not in himself, it is
not in man that walketh to direct his steps.</q><note place='foot'>Jer.
X, 33.</note> Special Providence
is discussed still more vividly and definitely in the book
of Job. Later on it becomes a specific Pharisaic doctrine,
<q>Everything is foreseen.</q><note place='foot'>Aboth
III, 15.</note> <q>No man suffers so much as the
injury of a finger unless it has been decreed in
heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Hul. 7 a.</note> A
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
divine preordination decides a man's choice of his
wife<note place='foot'>Gen. XXIV, 50; M. K. 18 b.</note> and
every other important step of his life.
</p>

<p>
4. This theory of predestination, however, presents a grave
difficulty when we consider it in relation to man's morality
with its implication of self-determination. While this question
of free will is treated fully in another
connection,<note place='foot'>Ch. <ref target='Chapter_XXXIV'>XXXIV</ref>.</note> we
may anticipate the thought at this point. The Jewish conception
of divine predestination makes as much allowance as
possible for the moral freedom of man. This is shown in
Talmudic sayings, such as <q>Everything is within the power of
God except the fear of God,</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 33 b.</note>
or <q>Repentance, prayer, and
charity avert the evil decree.</q><note place='foot'>R.
h. Sh. 17 b; New Year's liturgy.</note> Thus Maimonides expressly
states in his Code that the belief in predestination cannot be
allowed to influence one's moral or religious character. A
man can decide by his own volition whether he shall become
as just as Moses or as wicked as
Jeroboam.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>H. Teshubah</hi>, V, 1-2.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. The service of the New Year brings out significantly
the Jewish harmonization between the ideas of God's foreknowledge
and man's moral freedom. This festival, in the
Bible called the Festival of the Blowing of the Shofar, was
transformed under Babylonian influence into the Day of
Divine Judgment. But it is still in marked contrast to the
Babylonian New Year's Day, when the gods were supposed
to go to the House of the Tablets of Destiny in the deep to
hear the decisions of fate.<note place='foot'>See, on the Zagmuk
festival, Zimmern, K. A. T., p. 514 f.</note> The Jewish sages taught that on
this day God, the Judge of the world, pronounces the destinies
of men and nations according to their deserts. They thus
replaced the heathen idea of blind fate by that of eternal
justice as the formative power of life. Then, moved by a
desire to mitigate the rigor of stern justice for the frail and
failing mortal, they included also God's long-suffering and
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
mercy. These attributes are thus supposed to intercede, so
that the final decision is left in suspense until the Day of
Atonement, the great day of pardon. Some Tannaitic
teachers<note place='foot'>Tos. R. h. Sh, I, 13; R. h.
Sh. 16 a.</note> find it more in accord with their view of God
to say that He judges man every day, and even every
hour.
</p>

<p>
Of course, the philosophic mind can take this whole viewpoint
in a figurative sense alone. All the more must we recognize
that this sublime religious thought of God liberates
morality from the various limitations of the ancient pagan
conception of Deity and the more recent metaphysical view.
In place of these it asserts that there is a moral government
of the world, which must be imitated in the moral and religious
consciousness of the individual.
</p>

<p>
6. The belief in a moral government of the world answers
another question which the medieval Jewish philosophers
and their Mohammedan predecessors endeavored to solve,
but without satisfying the religious sentiment, the chief concern
of theology. Some of them maintain that God's foreknowledge
does not determine human deeds.<note place='foot'>Saadia:
<hi rend='italic'>Emunoth</hi>, IV, 7; Bahya: <hi rend='italic'>Hoboth
ha Lebaboth</hi>, III, 8; IV, 3.</note> Maimonides
and his school, however, say that it is impossible for us to
comprehend the knowledge and power of God, and that therefore
such a question is outside the sphere of human knowledge.
<q>Know that, just as God has made the elements of
fire and air to rise upwards and water and earth to sink downward,
so has He made man a free, self-determining being,
who acts of his own volition.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>H.
Teshubah</hi> V; <hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>, I, 23; III, 16-19; comp.
<hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>, V, 20-21; Albo:
<hi rend='italic'>Ikkarim</hi>, IV, 1-11; Gersonides:
<hi rend='italic'>Milhamoth</hi>, III, 2; VI, 1-18; Isaac ben Shesheth:
Responsa, 119; Lipman Heller to Aboth III, 15. See Joel: <hi rend='italic'>Levi ben
Gerson</hi>, p. 56.</note> The Mohammedans would
often give up human freedom rather than the omniscience
and all-determining power of God; but the Jewish thinkers,
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
significantly, with only the possible exception of Crescas,<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='italic'>Or Adonai</hi>, II, 3; comp. Joel:
<hi rend='italic'>Hasdai Crescas</hi>, 41-49, 54-55; Neumark:
<q><hi rend='italic'>Crescas and Spinoza</hi>,</q> in Y. B. C.
C. A. R., 1908, vol. XVIII, p. 277-319.</note>
laid stress upon the divine nature which man attains through
moral freedom, even at the risk of limiting the omniscience of
God.
</p>

<p>
7. The philosophers failed, however, to emphasize sufficiently
a point of highest importance for religion, God's
paternal care for all His creatures. Indeed, God ceases to be
God, if He has not included our every step in His plan of
creation, thus surrounding us with paternal love and tender
care. Instead of the three blind fates of heathendom who spin
and cut the threads of destiny without even knowing why,
the divine Father himself sits at the loom of time and apportions
the lot of men according to His own wisdom and goodness.
Such a belief in divine Providence is ingrained in the
soul, and reasoning alone will not suffice to attain it. Therefore
even such great thinkers as Maimonides and Gersonides
go astray as religious teachers when they follow Aristotelian
principles in this very intimate matter. They assume a
general Providence aiming for the preservation of the species,
but include a special Providence only so far as the recipient
of it is endowed with reason and has thus approached the
divine Intellect. A Providence of this type, the result of
human reasoning, is a mere illusion, as the pious thinker,
Hasdai Crescas, clearly shows.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Or
Adonai</hi>, III, 24.</note> For the man who prays to
God in anxiety or distress this bears nothing but disappointment.
</p>

<p>
The Aristotelian conception of the world has this great
truth, that there is no such thing as chance, that everything
is foreseen and provided by the divine wisdom. But religion
must hold that the individual is an object of care by God,
that <q>not a sparrow falls into the net without God's will,</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
R. LXXIX, 16; comp. Matt. X, 29.</note>
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
that <q>every hair on the head of man is counted and cared for
in the heavenly order,</q><note place='foot'>B. B. 16 a;
comp. Matt. X, 30; Luke XII, 7.</note> and that the most insignificant
thing serves its purpose under the guidance of an all-wise
God. We use figurative expressions for the divine care,
because we cannot grasp it entirely or literally.
</p>

<p>
8. The Bible in the Song of Moses compares divine Providence
to the eagle spreading her protecting wings over her
young and bearing them aloft, or urging them to soar
along.<note place='foot'>Deut. XXXII, 11.</note>
The rabbis elaborate this by referring to the twofold care
which the eagle thus bestows, as she watches over those who
are still tender and helpless, shielding them from the arrows
below by bearing them on her wings, but inspiring the maturer
and stronger ones to fly by her side.<note place='foot'>Mek.
Yithro 2; Sifre ad loc.</note> In the same way Providence
trains both individuals and generations for their allotted
task. A little child requires incessant care on the part
of its mother, until it has learned how to eat, walk, speak,
and to decide for itself, but the wise parent gradually withdraws
his guiding hand so that the growing child may learn
self-reliance and self-respect. The divine Father trains man
thus through the childhood of humanity. But no sooner does
the divine spirit in man awaken to self-consciousness than he
is thrown on his own resources to become the master of his
own destiny. The divine power which, in the earlier stages,
had worked <emph>for</emph> man, now works <emph>with</emph>
him and <emph>within</emph> him.
In the rabbinic phrase, he is now ready to be a <q>co-worker
with God in the work of creation.</q><note place='foot'>Shab.
119 b.</note> Only at those grave
moments when his own powers fail him, he still feels in the
humility of faith that his ancient God is still near, <q>a very
present help in trouble,</q> and that <q>the Guardian of Israel
neither slumbereth nor sleepeth.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XLVI, 2; CXXI, 4.</note>
</p>

<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>

<p>
Philosophy cannot tolerate the removal of the dividing line
between the transcendent God and finite man. Hence the
relation of man's free will and divine foresight cannot be
solved by any process of reasoning. But when religion proclaims
a moral government of the world, then man, with his
moral and spiritual aims, attains a place in Creation akin
to the Creator. Of course, so long as he is mentally a child
and has no clear purpose, Providence acts for him as it does
for the animal with its marvelous instinct. Through His
chosen messengers God gives the people bread and water,
freedom and victory, instruction and law. The wondrous
tales describing the divine protection of Israel in its early life
may strike us as out of harmony with the laws of nature,
but they are true portrayals of the experience of the people.
Whatever happened for their good in those days had to be
the work of God; they had not yet wakened to the power
hidden in their own soul. Their heroes felt themselves to be
divine instruments, roused by His spirit to perform mighty
deeds or to behold prophetic visions. It is God who battles
through them. It is God who speaks through them. Both
their moral and spiritual guidance works from without and
above. At this stage of life autonomy is neither felt nor
desired. When man awakens to moral self-consciousness and
maturity, this inner change impresses him as an outer one;
the change in him is interpreted as a change in God. He feels
that God has withdrawn behind His eternal laws of nature
and morality which work without direct interference, and in
his new sense of independence he thinks that he can dispense
with the divine protection and forethought. As if mortal
man can ever dispense with that Power which has endowed
him with his capacity for worthy accomplishment! Thus in
times of danger and distress man turns to God for help;
thus at every great turning point in the life of an individual
or nation the idea of an all-wise Providence imbues him with
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
new hope and new security. And in all these cases the great
lesson of providential direction is typified in the history of
Israel as related in the Bible.
</p>

<p>
10. The idea of Providence, indeed, belongs also to certain
pagan philosophers, who observed the great purposes of
nature which the single creature and the species are both to
serve. The Stoics in particular made a study of teleology,
the system of purposive ends in nature. Philo adopted much
from them in his treatise on Providence. Later the popular
philosophic group among the Mohammedans, the so-called
<q>Brothers of Purity,</q> based their doctrines of God and His
relation to the world on a teleological view of nature. In
fact, the Jewish philosopher and moralist Bahya ben Pakudah
has embodied many of their ideas in his <q>Duties of the
Heart.</q><note place='foot'>See David Kaufmann: <q><hi rend='italic'>Theol.
d. B. b. Pakudah</hi>,</q> p. 240.</note>
</p>

<p>
Jewish folklore&mdash;preserved in rabbinic literature&mdash;has
also attempted a popular explanation of the obscure ways of
Providence, in strange events of nature as well as the great
enigmas of human destiny. Thus the flight of David from
Saul affords the lesson of the good purpose which may be
served by so insignificant a thing as a spider, or by so dreadful
a state as insanity.<note place='foot'>Mid. Teh. to Ps.
XXXIV; L. Ginzberg, <hi rend='italic'>Legends of the Jews</hi>, IV, 89-90;
<hi rend='italic'>Alphabet of Ben Sira</hi>.</note> Vast numbers of the Jewish legends
and fables deal with adversities which are turned into ultimate
good by the working of an all-wise Providence.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comp.
Maasehhbuch</hi>; Tendlau: <hi rend='italic'>Sagen d. jued. Vorzeit</hi>.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXIX. God and the Existence of Evil</head>

<p>
1. A leading objection to the belief in divine Providence
is the existence in this world of physical and moral evil. All
living creatures are exposed to the influence of evil, according
to their physical or moral constitutions and the peculiar conditions
of their existence. Heathenism accounts for the
powers of darkness, pain and death by assuming the existence
of forces hostile to the heavenly powers of light and life,
or of a primitive principle of evil, the counterpart of the
divine beings. But to those who believe in an almighty and
all-benign Creator and Ruler of the universe, the question
remains: Why do life and the love of life encounter so many
hindrances? Why does God's world contain so much pain
and bitterness, so much passion and sin? Should not Providence
have averted such things? The answer of Judaism
has already been stated here, but we need further elaboration
of the theme that there is no evil before God, since a good
purpose is served even by that which appears bad. In the
life of the human body pleasure and pain, the impetus to life
and its restraint and inhibition form a necessary contrast,
making for health; so, in the moral order of the universe,
each being who battles with evil receives new strength for the
unfolding of the good. The principle of holiness, which culminates
in Israel's holy God, transforms and ennobles every
evil. As the Midrash explains, referring to Deut. XI, 26:
<q>If thou but seest that both good and evil are placed in thy
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
hand, no evil will come to thee from above, since thou knowest
how to turn it into good.</q><note place='foot'>See Gen.
R. IX, 5, 10, 11; Dillmann, l. c., 309-318; D. F. Strauss, l. c., II,
343-384.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. The conception of evil passed through a development
parallel with that of the related conceptions which we have
just reviewed. At first every misfortune was considered to
be inflicted by divine wrath as a punishment for human misdeeds.
Nations and individuals were thought to suffer for
some special moral cause; through suffering they were
punished for past wrong, warned against its repetition in the
future, and urged to repentance and improvement of their
conduct. Even death, the fate of all living creatures, was
regarded as a punishment which the first pair of human beings
brought upon all their descendants through their transgression
of the divine command. The Talmudic sages clung to the
view of the Paradise legend in the Bible, when they held that
every death is due to some sin committed by the
individual.<note place='foot'>Shab. 55 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
This view, which was shared by paganism, was accompanied
by a higher conception, gradually growing in the
thinking mind. As a father does not punish his child in
anger, but in order to improve his conduct, so God chastens
man in order to purify his moral nature. Good fortune tends
to harden the heart; adversity often softens and sweetens it.
In the crucible of suffering the gold of the human soul is purified
from the dross. The evil strokes of destiny come upon
the righteous, not because he deserves them, but because his
divine Friend is raising him to still higher tests of virtue.
This standpoint, never reached even by the pious sufferer
Job, is attained by rabbinic Judaism when it calls the visitations
of the righteous <q>trials of the divine love.</q><note place='foot'>Ber.
5 a, after Deut. VIII, 5; Prov. III, 12.</note> Thus evil,
both physical and spiritual, receives its true valuation in the
divine economy. Evil exists only to be overcome by the
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
good. In His paternal goodness God uses it to educate His
children for a place in His kingdom.
</p>

<p>
3. According to the direct words of Scripture good and
evil, light and darkness, emanate alike from the Creator.
This is accentuated by the great seer of the
Exile,<note place='foot'>Isa. XLV, 7.</note> who protests
against the Persian belief in a creative principle of good
and a destructive principle of evil. The rabbis, however,
ascribe the origin of evil to man; they take as a negation
rather than a question the verse in Lam. III, 38: <q>Do not
evil and good come out of the mouth of the Most High?</q>
Thus they refer this to the words of Deuteronomy, <q>Behold,
I have set before you this day life and good, death and evil;
choose thou life!</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XI, 27; see the Midrash ad loc.</note>
</p>

<p>
Such medieval thinkers as Abraham Ibn Daud and Maimonides
did not ascribe to evil any reality at all.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Emunah
Ramah</hi>, ed. Weil, 93 f.; <hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>, III, 10.</note> Evil to
them is the negation of good, just as darkness is the negation
of light, or poverty of riches. As evil exists only for man,
man can overcome it by himself. Before God it has no essential
existence. Unfortunately, such metaphysics does not
equip man with strength and courage to cope with either pain
or sin. The same lack is evident in that modern form of
pseudo-science which poses as a religion, Christian Science,
which has made propaganda so widely among both Jews and
non-Jews. Christian Science declares pain, sickness, and all
evil to be merely the <q>error of mortal mind,</q> which can all
be dispelled by faith; such a view neither strengthens the
soul for its real struggles nor convinces the mind by an appeal
to facts.<note place='foot'>See M. Lefkovitz, <q>The Attitude
of Judaism to Christian Science,</q> in
Y. B. C. C. A. R. XXII, 300-318.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. Frail mortals as we are, we need the help of the living
God. Thus only can we overcome physical evil, knowing
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
that He bears with us, feels with us, and transforms it finally
into good. We need it also to overcome moral evil, in the
consciousness that He has compassion upon the repentant
sinner and gives him courage to follow the right path. The
modern philosophers of pessimism had the correct feeling in
adopting the Hindu conception, and emphasizing the pain
and misery of existence, repeating Job's ancient plaint over
the hard destiny of mankind. The shallow optimism of the
age would rather conceal the dark side of life and indulge in
outbursts of self-sufficiency. Yet if we measure it only by a
physical yardstick, life cannot be called a boon. Against
shallow optimism we have the testimony of every thorn and
sting, every poisonous breath and every destructive element in
nature's household, as well as all vice and evil in the world of
man. The world does not appear good, unless we measure it
by the ideal of divine holiness. If God is the Father watching
over the welfare of every mortal, all things are good, because
all serve a good purpose in His eternal plan. Every
hindrance or pressure engenders new power; every sting acts
as a spur to higher things. Short-sighted and short-lived as
is man, he forgets too easily that in the sight of God <q>a
thousand years are as a single day,</q> world-epochs like
<q>watches in the night,</q> and that the mills of divine justice
grind on, <q>slowly but exceeding small.</q> But one belief illumines
the darkness of destiny, and that is that God stands ever
at the helm, steering through every storm and tempest toward
His sublime goal. In the moral striving of man we can but
realize that our every victory contributes toward the majestic
work of God.<note place='foot'>See Morris Joseph, l. c.,
p. 108, 127 ff.; C. Seligman, l. c., 50-68.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXX. God and the Angels</head>

<p>
1. Judaism insists with unrelenting severity on the absolute
unity and incomparability of God, so that no other
being can be placed beside Him. Consequently, every mention
of divine beings (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign> or
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>B'ne Elohim</foreign>) in either the
Bible or post-Biblical literature refers to subordinate beings
only. These spirits constitute the celestial court for the
King of the World.<note place='foot'>Gen. VI, 2;
Job I, 6; II, 1; XXXIII, 7; Gen. XXXII, 29; XXXIII,
10; Jud. XIII, 22; Ps. VIII, 6.</note> All the forces of the universe are His
servants, fulfilling His commands. Hence both the Hebrew
and Greek terms for angel, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Malak</foreign> and
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>angelos</foreign>, mean <q>messenger.</q>
These beings derive their existence from God; some
of them are merely temporary, so that without Him they
dissolve into nothing. Although Scripture uses the terms,
<q>God of gods</q> and <q>King of kings,</q> still we cannot attribute
any independent existence to subordinate divine beings. In
fact, Maimonides in his sixth article of faith holds that worship
of such beings is prohibited as idolatry by the second
commandment.<note place='foot'>Comp. Mek. Yithro 7
through 10; Hul. 40; Tos. Hul. II, 18; Ab. Z.
42 b; Maimonides to Sanh. X; Targ. Y. to Ex. XX, 3.</note>
Thus the unity of God lifts Him above
comparison with any other divine being. This is most emphatically
expressed in Deuteronomy: <q>Know this day, and
lay it to thy heart, that the Lord He is God in heaven above,
and upon the earth beneath; there is none else,</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
IV, 39.</note> and <q>See
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
now that I, even I, am He, and there is no god with Me; I
kill and make alive; I have wounded and I heal, and there is
none that can deliver out of My hand.</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
XXXII, 39.</note> The same attitude
is found in Isaiah: <q>I am the Lord that maketh all things,
that stretched forth the heavens alone, that spread abroad
the earth by Myself</q> <q>I am the Lord and there is none
else; beside Me there is no god.</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
XLIV, 24; XL, 5.</note> Such conceptions allow
no place for angels or spirits.
</p>

<p>
2. It was certainly not easy for prophet, lawgiver, or sage
to dispel the popular belief in divine beings or powers, which
primitive Judaism shared with other ancient faiths. No
sharp line was drawn at first between God and His accompanying
angels, as we may infer from the story of the angels
who appeared to Abraham, and the similar incidents of
Hagar and Jacob.<note place='foot'>Gen. XVIII
and XVII, 11, 13.</note> The varying application of the term
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign>
to God and to the angels or gods is proof enough
of the priority of polytheism, even in Judaism. The trees or
springs, formerly seats of the ancient deities, spirits, or demons,
were now the places for the appearance of angels,
shorn of their independence, looking like fiery or shining human
beings. Popular belief, however, perpetuated mythological
elements, ascribing to the angels higher wisdom and sometimes
sensuality as well. Such a case is the fragment preserved
in Genesis telling of the union of sons of God to the
daughters of men, causing the generation of
giants.<note place='foot'>Gen. VI, 1 f.</note> Obviously
the old Babylonian <q>mountain of the gods,</q> with its
food for the gods, became in the Paradise legend the garden
of Eden, the seat of God;<note place='foot'>Comp.
Ezek. XXVIII, 13 f.</note> and the Psalmist still speaks of
the <q>angels' food,</q> which appeared as manna
in the wilderness.<note place='foot'>Ps. LXXVIII, 25.</note>
On the whole, the sacred writers were most eager to allot to
the angels a very subordinate position in the divine household.
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
They figure usually as hosts of beings, numbered by myriads,
wrapped in light or in fleeting clouds. They surround the
throne or chariot of God; they comprise His heavenly court
or council; they sing His praise and obey His call.
</p>

<p>
Scripture is quite silent about the creation of these angelic
beings, as on most purely speculative questions. At the
very beginning of the world God consults them when He is
to create man after the image of the celestial beings. For
this is the original meaning of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign>
in Gen. I, 26 and 27
and V, 1: <q>Let us make man in our image, after our likeness</q>;
<q>And God created man in his own image, in the image
of godly beings He created him.</q> This view is echoed in
Psalm VIII, verse 6: <q>Thou hast made him a little lower
than godly beings.</q> In Job XXXVIII, 7, both the morning
stars and the sons of God, or angels, <q>shout together in joy</q>
when the Lord laid the foundations of the
earth.<note place='foot'>See Dillmann, l. c., 318-333; Davidson, l. c., 289-300; J. E.,
art. Angelology; Enc. Rel. and Eth. IV, 594-601, art. Demons.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. In Biblical times&mdash;which does not include the book of
Daniel, a work of the Maccabean time&mdash;the angels and
demons were not invested with proper names or special functions.
The Biblical system does not even distinguish clearly
between good and evil spirits. The goat-like demons of the
field popularly worshiped were merely survivals of pagan
superstitions.<note place='foot'>Lev. XVII, 7; Deut. XXXII, 17; Isa. XXXIV, 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
In general the angels carry out good or evil designs according
to their commands from the Lord of Hosts. They are
sent forth to destroy Sodom, to save Lot, and to bring Abraham
the good tidings of the birth of a son.<note place='foot'>Gen. XVIII.</note> On one
occasion the host of spirits protect the people of God; on another they
annihilate hostile powers by pestilence and plagues.<note place='foot'>Ex.
XXIII, 20; II Sam. XXIV, 16; II Kings XIX, 35 <hi rend='italic'>et al.</hi> See J. E.,
art. Angelology.</note> At one
time a multitude appear, led by a celestial chieftain; at another
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
a single angel performs the miracle. In any case the
destroying angel is not a demon, but a messenger of the divine
will. Originally some of these primitive forces were dreaded
or worshiped by the people, but all have been transformed
into members of the celestial court and called to bear witness
to the dominion of the Omnipotent.
</p>

<p>
4. The belief in angels served two functions in the development
of monotheism. On the one hand, it was a stage in the
concentration of the divine forces, beginning with polytheism,
continuing through belief in angels, and culminating in the
one and only God of heaven and earth. On the other hand,
certain sensuous elements in the vision of God by the seers
had to be removed in the spiritualization of God, and it was
found easiest to transform these into separate beings, related
to Deity himself. Thus the fiery appearance of God to the
eye or the voice which was manifested to the ear were often
personified as angels of God. This very process made possible
the purification of the God idea, as the sublime essence
of the Deity was divested of physical and temporal elements,
and God was conceived more and more as a moral and spiritual
personality. Hence in Biblical passages the names of God
and of the angel frequently alternate.<note place='foot'>Ex.
III, 2-4; XXIII, 20-21; Isa. LXIII, 9.</note> The latter is only a
representative of the divine personality&mdash;in Scriptural terms,
the presence or <q>face</q> of God. Therefore the voice of the
angel is to be obeyed as that of God himself, because His
name is present in His representative. A similar meaning became
attached later on to the term <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shekinah</foreign>,
the <q>majesty</q> of God as beheld in the cloud of fire. This was spoken of in
place of God that He might not be lowered into the earthly
sphere. For further discussion of this subject, see chapter
<ref target='Chapter_XXXII'>XXXII</ref>, <q>God and Intermediary Powers.</q> In fact, we
note that the post-exilic prophets all received their revelations, not
from God, but through a special angel.<note place='foot'>Zech. I, 9 f.; II, 1 f.</note>
They no longer
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
believed that God might be seen or heard by human powers,
and therefore their visions had to be translated into rational
thoughts by a mediating angel.
</p>

<p>
5. Persian influence gave Jewish angelology and demonology
a different character. The two realms of the Persian
system included vast hosts of beneficent spirits under Ahura-Mazda
(Ormuzd) and of demons under the dominion of Angro-mainyus
(Ahriman). So in Judaism also different orders of
angels arose, headed by archangels who bore special names.
The number seven was adopted from the Persians, while both
names and order were often changed. All of them, however,
were allotted special functions in the divine household. The
pagan deities and primitive spirits which still persisted in
popular superstition were given a new lease of life. Each force
of nature was given a guardian spirit, just as in nature-worship;
angels were appointed over fire, water, each herb, each
fountain, and every separate function of life. A patron angel
was assigned to each of the seventy nations of the world mentioned
in the genealogy of Noah.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Angelology.</note>
</p>

<p>
Thus the celestial court grew in number and in splendor. A
beginning was made with the heavenly chariot-throne of Ezekiel,
borne aloft by the four holy living creatures
(the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hayoth</foreign>),
surrounded by the fiery <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Cherubim</foreign>,
the winged <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Seraphim</foreign>, and
the many-eyed <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ofanim</foreign>
(wheels).<note place='foot'>Ezek. I, 4-24; X, 1-22; Isa. VI,
2; Dan. IV, 10 f.; VII, 9 f.; VIII, 16 f.;
X, 13 f; Enoch XV, 1 f., and elsewhere.</note> This was elaborated by
the addition of rows of surrounding angels, called <q>angels of
service,</q> headed by the seven archangels. Of these the chief
was Michael, the patron-saint of Israel, and the next Gabriel,
who is sometimes even placed first. Raphael and Uriel are
regularly mentioned, the other three rarely, and not always
by the same names. The <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Irin</foreign>
of Daniel&mdash;known as <q>the
Watchers,</q> but more precisely <q>the ever-watchful Ones</q>&mdash;are
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
another of the ten classes of angels included. Below these
are myriads of inferior angels who serve them. Their classification
by rank was a favorite theme of the secret lore of the
Essenes, partly preserved for us in the apocalyptic literature
and the liturgy. The Essenic saints endeavored to acquire
miraculous powers through using the names of certain angels,
and thus exorcising the evil spirits.
</p>

<p>
This secret lore seems to be patterned after the Zoroastrian
or Mazdean system. It is noteworthy that the most prominent
angelic figure is <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Metatron</foreign>,
the charioteer of the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Merkabah</foreign>
or chariot-throne on high, which is merely another form of
<foreign rend='italic'>Mithras</foreign>, the Persian god of light, who acts as charioteer
for Ahura Mazda.<note place='foot'>See J. E.,
art. Merkabah, though still doubted by Bousset, l. c., p. 406.
For Akathriel see Ber. 7 and J. E., art. Sandalfon.</note>
Two other angels are mentioned as
standing behind the heavenly throne,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Akathriel</foreign>, <q>the crown-bearer
of God,</q> and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Sandalphon</foreign>,
<q>the twin brother</q> = Synadelphon.
</p>

<p>
6. A striking contrast exists between the simple habitation
in the sky depicted in the prophetic and Mosaic books, and
the splendor of the heavenly spheres according to the rabbinical
writings. The Oriental courts lent all their grandeur to the
majestic throne of God, on which He was exalted above all
earthly things. The immense space between was filled in by
innumerable gradations of beings leading up to Him. There
was no longer a question how far these other beings shared
the nature of God; His dominion was absolute. Still a new
question, not known to the Bible, arose, as to when the angelic
world was created and out of what primordial element. At
first a logical answer was given, that the angels emanated
from the element of fire. Later the schoolmen, trying to dispose
of the angels as possible peers or rivals of the eternal
God, ascribed their creation to the second day, when the
heaven was made as a vault over the earth, or to the fifth
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
day, when the winged creatures arose.<note place='foot'>Jubilees
II, 2; Slav. Enoch. XXIX, 3; I, 3; Gen. R, III, 11.</note> On the whole, the
rabbis denied every claim of the angels to an independent or
an eternal existence. Just because they firmly believed in the
existence of angels and even saw them from time to time,
they felt bound to declare their secondary rank. Only the
archangels were made from an eternal substance, while the
others were continually being created anew out of the breath
of God or from the <q>river of fire</q> which flowed around His
throne. Thus even the realm of celestial spirits was merged
into the stream of universal life which comes and goes, while
God was left alone in matchless sovereignty, above all the
fluctuations of time.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, the rabbis opposed the Essenic idea of
assigning to the angels an intermediary task between God and
man, and deprecated as a pagan custom the worship or invocation
of angels. <q>Address your prayer to the Master of life
and not to His servants; He will hear you in every trouble,</q>
says R. Judan.<note place='foot'>Yer. Ber. IX; Sanh. 93 a; Hul.
91 b; Ned. 32 a; Gen. R. VIII, XXI;
Midr. Teh. to Ps. CIII, 18; CIV, 1.</note> Some of the teachers even declared that any
godly son of Israel excels the angels in power. It is certainly
significant, as David Neumark has pointed out, that the
Mishnah eliminates every reference to the angels.<note place='foot'>Neumark, l. c.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. In spite of this, none of the medieval Jewish philosophers
doubted the existence of angels.<note place='foot'>Schmiedl,
l. c., 69-87.</note> Indeed, there was no
reason for them to do so, as they had managed to insert them
into their philosophic systems as intermediary beings leading
up to the Supreme Intelligence. All that was necessary was
to identify the angels of the Bible with the <q>ideas</q> of Plato
or the <q>rulers of the spheres,</q> the <q>separate intelligences</q>
of Aristotle. By this one step the existence of angels as
cosmic powers was proved to be a logical necessity. The ten
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
rulers of the spheres even corresponded with the ten orders of
angels in the cosmography of the Jewish, Mohammedan, and
Christian schoolmen. The only difference between the Aristotelian
and the rabbinical views was that the former held
the cosmic powers to be eternal; the latter, that they were
created.
</p>

<p>
In both Biblical and rabbinical literature the angels are
usually conceived of as purely spiritual powers superior to man.
Maimonides, however, following his rationalistic method, declared
them to be simply products of the imagination, the
hypostases of figurative expressions which were not meant
to be taken literally. To him every force and element of
nature is an angel or messenger of God. In this way the
entire angelology of the Bible, including even Ezekiel's vision
of the heavenly chariot (the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Merkabah</foreign>),
in becoming a part of the Maimonidean system turns into natural philosophy
pure and simple.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Yesode ha Torah</hi>,
II, 4-9; <hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>, I, 43; II, 3-7, 41; III, 13; Husik, l. c.,
303 f.</note> Of course, Saadia, Jehuda ha Levi, and Gabirol
do not share this rationalistic view. To them the angels
are either cosmic powers of an ethereal substance, endowed
with everlasting life, or living beings created by God for
special purposes.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Emunoth</hi>, IV, 1; VI, 2;
<hi rend='italic'>Hoboth ha Lebaboth</hi>, I, 6;
<hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>, IV, 3; <hi rend='italic'>Emunah
Ramah</hi>, IV, 2; VI, 1; <hi rend='italic'>Ikkarim</hi>, II, 28, 31.</note>
</p>

<p>
The later Cabbalistic lore extended the realm of the celestial
spirits still more, creating new names of angels for its mystical
system and its magical practices. Yet in this magic it subordinated
the angels to man. In fact, it followed Saadia
largely in this, making man the center and pinnacle of the
work of creation, in fact, the very mirror of the
Creator.<note place='foot'>Zohar, III, 68; Joel: <hi rend='italic'>Religionsphilosophie
des Zohar</hi>, 278 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. For our modern viewpoint the existence of angels is a
question of psychology rather than of theology. The old
Babylonian world has vanished, with its heaven as the dwelling
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
place of God, its earth for man, and its nether world for
the shades and demons. The world in which we live knows
no above or beneath, no heaven or hell, no host of good and
evil spirits moving about to help or hurt man. It sees matter
and energy working everywhere after the same immutable
laws through an infinitude of space and time, a universe ever
evolving new orbs of light, engendering and transforming
worlds without number and without end. There is no place
in infinite space for a heaven or for a celestial throne. A
world of law and of process does not need a living ladder to
lead from the earth below to God on high. Though the stars
be peopled with souls superior to ours, still they cannot stand
nearer to God than does man with his freedom, his moral
striving, his visions of the highest and the best. Through
man's spiritual nature God, too, is recognized as a Spirit;
through man's moral consciousness God is conceived of as the
Ruler of a moral world; but this same process at once does
away with the need for any other spirits or divine powers
beside Him. God alone has become the object of human
longing. Man feels akin to His God who is ever near; he
learns to know Him ever better. He can dispense with the
angelic hosts. As they return to the fiery stream of poetic
imagination whence they emerged, nebulous figures of a glorious
world that has vanished, man rises above angel and
Seraph by his own power to the dignity of a servant, nay, a
child of God. Indeed, as the rabbis said, the prophets, sages,
and seers are the true messengers of God, the angels who do
His service.<note place='foot'>Ned. 20 b; Midr.
Teh. Ps. CIII, 17-18; Ibn Ezra: Introduction to his
commentary on the Pentateuch.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXXI. Satan and the Spirits of Evil</head>

<p>
1. The great advantage of Judaism over other religious
systems lies in its unified view of life, which it regards as a
continuous conflict between good and evil influences within
man. As man succeeds in overcoming evil and achieving
good, he asserts his own moral personality. Outside of man
Judaism sees no real contrast between good and evil, since
both have emanated from God, the Spirit of goodness. Judaism
recognizes no primal power of evil plotting against
God and defying Him, such as that of the Persian dualism.
Nor does Judaism espouse the dualism of spirit and matter,
identifying matter with evil, from which the soul strives to
free itself while confined in the prison house of the body.
Such a conception is taught by Plato, probably under Oriental
influence, and is shared by the Hindu and Christian ascetics
who torture themselves in order to suppress bodily desire in
their quest of a higher existence. The Jewish conception of
the unity of God necessitates the unity of the world, which
leaves no place for a cosmic principle of evil. In this Judaism
dissents from modern philosophers also, such as John Stuart
Mill and even Kant, who speak of a radical evil in nature.
No power of evil can exist in independence of
God.<note place='foot'>Compare Gen. R. to Gen. I, 31.</note> As the
Psalmist says: <q>His kingdom ruleth over all. Bless the
Lord, ye angels of His, ye mighty in strength that fulfill His
word, hearkening unto the voice of His word.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. CIII, 19-20.</note>
</p>

<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>

<p>
This increased the difficulty of the problem of the origin of
evil. The answer given by the general Jewish consciousness,
expressed by both Biblical and rabbinical writers, is that evil
comes from the free will of man, who is endowed with the
power of rebelling against the will of God. This idea is symbolized
in the story of the fall of man. The serpent, or tempter,
represents the evil inclination which arises in man with his
first consciousness of freedom. So in Jewish belief Satan,
the Adversary, is only an allegorical figure, representing the
evil of the world, both physical and moral. He was sent by
God to test man for his own good, to develop him morally.
He is <q>the spirit that ever wills evil, but achieves the good,</q>
and therefore in the book of Job he actually comes before
God's throne as one of the angels.<note place='foot'>Job I, 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. In tracing the belief in demons we must draw a sharp
distinction between popular views and systematic
doctrine.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Demonology; Satan; Belial; Enc. Rel. and
Eth., art. Demons and Spirits, Jewish; Davidson, l. c., 300-306; Dillmann, l. c., 334-340;
D. F. Strauss, l. c., II, 1-18.</note>
During the Biblical era the people believed in goat-like spirits
roaming the fields and woods, the deserts and ravines, whom
they called <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Seirim</foreign>&mdash;hairy
demons, or satyrs,&mdash;and to whom
they sacrificed in fear and trembling.<note place='foot'>Lev.
XVII, 7; Deut. XXXII, 17; Isa. XIII, 21; XXXIV, 14.</note> As Ibn Ezra ingeniously
pointed out in his commentary, Azazel was originally
a desert demon dwelling in the ravines near Jerusalem,
to whom a scapegoat was offered at the opening of the year,
a rite preserved in the Day of Atonement cult of the Mosaic
Code.<note place='foot'>Lev. XVI, 8; see Ibn Ezra; J. E. and Enc.
Rel. and Eth., art. Azazel.</note> In fact, in ancient Babylon, Syria, and Palestine
diseases and accidents were universally ascribed to evil
spirits of the wilderness or the nether world. The Bible
occasionally mentions these evil spirits as punitive angels
sent by God. In the more popular view, which is reflected
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
by apocryphal and rabbinical literature, and which was influenced
by both the Babylonian and Persian religions, they
appear in increasing numbers and with specific names. Each
disease had its peculiar demon. Desolate places, cemeteries,
and the darkness of night were all peopled by superstition
with hosts of demons (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shedim</foreign>),
at whose head was <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Azazel</foreign>,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Samael</foreign>;
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Beelzebub</foreign>, the
Philistine god of flies and of illness;<note place='foot'>J. E., art. Beelzebub.</note>
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Belial</foreign>, king of the nether
world;<note place='foot'>J. E., art. Belial.</note> or the Persian
<foreign rend='italic'>Ashma Deva</foreign> (Evil Spirit), under the Hebrew name of
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ashmodai</foreign> or
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shemachzai</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Enoch VI, 7;
J. E., art. Ashmodai; Levy: W. B., Shemachzai.</note>
The queen of the demons was <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Lilith</foreign> or
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Iggereth bath Mahlath</foreign>,
<q>the dancer on the housetops.</q><note place='foot'>Levy: W. B., Lilith;
Iggereth.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Essenes seem to have made special studies of both
demonology and angelology, believing that they could invoke
the good spirits and conjure the evil ones, thus curing various
diseases, which they ascribed to possession by demons. While
these exorcisms are not so common in the Talmud as they are
in the New Testament, there remain many indications that
such practices were followed by Jewish saints and believed
by the people. Often the rabbis seem to have considered
them the work of <q>unclean spirits,</q> which they endeavored
to overcome with the <q>spirit of holiness,</q> and particularly
by the study of the Torah.<note place='foot'>J. E., art. Demonology.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. This answers implicitly the question of the origin of
demons. Obviously the belief in malevolent spirits is incompatible
with the existence of an all-benign and all-wise Creator.
Accordingly, two alternative explanations are offered in the
rabbinical and apocalyptic writings. According to one, the
demons are half angelic and half animal beings, sharing intelligence
and flight with the angels, sensuality with beasts
and with men. Their double nature is ascribed to incompleteness,
because they were created last of all beings, and
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
their creation was interrupted by the coming of the Sabbath,
putting an end to all creation.<note place='foot'>Aboth V, 6;
P. d. R. El., XIX; Gen. R. VII, 7.</note> According to the other view
they are the offspring of the <q>fallen angels,</q> issuing from the
union of the angels with the daughters of men as described in
Gen. VI, 1 f. These spread the virus of impurity over all the
earth, causing carnal desire and every kind of lewdness. The
whole world of demons is regarded as alienated from God by
the rebellion of the heavenly hosts, as if the fall of man by
sin had its prototype in the celestial
sphere.<note place='foot'>Enoch VII; Yalkut Gen. 44, 47.</note> A rabbinical
legend, which corresponds with a Persian myth, ascribes the
origin of demons to the intercourse of Adam with Lilith, the
night spirit.<note place='foot'>Erubin, 18 b.</note>
On the other hand, the archangel Samael is
said to have cast lascivious glances at the beauty of Eve, and
then to have turned into Satan the Tempter.<note place='foot'>P.
d. R. El., XIII; Yalkut Gen. 25.</note> The Jewish
systems of both angelology and demonology, first worked out
in the apocalyptic literature, were further elaborated by the
Cabbalah.
</p>

<p>
Angelology found a conspicuous place in the liturgy in
connection with the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Kedushah</foreign>
Benediction and likewise in
the liturgy and the theology of the Church.<note place='foot'>See
Abrahams' Ann. to Singers' <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb</hi>.
XLIV f. and for the Church, Enc.
Rel, and Eth., Demons and Spirits, Christian.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the other hand the belief in evil spirits and in Satan,
the Evil One, remained rather a matter of popular credulity
and never became a positive doctrine of the Synagogue.
True, the liturgy contained morning prayers which asked God
for protection against the Evil One, and formulas invoking
the angels to shield one during the night from evil
spirits.<note place='foot'>Abrahams, l. c., p. 7, 196; XX, CCXV.</note>
But the arch-fiend was never invested with power over the
soul, depriving man of his perfect freedom and divine sovereignty,
as in the Christian Church.
</p>

<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>

<p>
4. In the formation of the idea of the arch-fiend, Satan,
we can observe the interworking of several elements. The
name Satan in no way indicates a demon. It denotes simply
the adversary, the one who offers hindrances. The name was
thus applied to the accuser at court.<note place='foot'>Ps.
CIX, 6.</note> In Zechariah and in
Job<note place='foot'>Zech. III, 1; Job I, 6.</note>
Satan appears at the throne of God as the prosecutor,
roaming about the earth to espy the transgressions of men,
seeking to lure them to their destruction. In the Books of
Chronicles<note place='foot'>I Chron. XXI, 1.</note>
Satan has become a proper name, meaning the
Seducer.
</p>

<p>
The Serpent in the Paradise story is more completely a
demon, although the legend intends rather to account for
man's morality, his distinction between good and evil. Satan
was then identified with the serpent, who was called by the
rabbis <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Nahash ha Kadmoni</foreign>,
<q>the primeval Serpent,</q> after
the analogy of the serpent-like form of Ahriman. Thus
Satan in the person of the serpent became the embodiment of
evil, the prime cause of sin and death.<note place='foot'>See
B. Wisdom II, 24; P. d. R. El., XIII.</note> Possibly a part in
this process was played by the Babylonian figure of
<foreign rend='italic'>Tihamat</foreign>,
the dragon of <emph>chaos</emph> (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Tehom</foreign>
in the Hebrew), with whom the
god Marduk wrestled for dominion over the world, and who
has parallels in the Biblical Rahab and similar mythological
figures.
</p>

<p>
We must not overlook such rabbinical legends as the one
about how the poisonous breath of the serpent infected the
whole human race, except Israel who has been saved by the law
at Sinai.<note place='foot'>Shab. 146 a; Yeb. 103 b; Ab.
Zar. 22 b.</note> Occasionally we hear that the Evil Spirit
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Yezer ha Ra</foreign>)
will be slain by God<note place='foot'>Suk. 52 a.</note>
or by the Messiah.<note place='foot'>Targ. to Isa. XI, 4.</note> These Haggadic
sayings, however, were never accepted as normative for religious
belief. On the contrary, they were always in dispute,
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
and many a Talmudic teacher minimized the fiendish character
of Satan, who became a stimulus to moral betterment through
the trials he imposes.<note place='foot'>B. B.
16 a.</note> Philo, allegorizing the legends, turns
the evil angels of the Bible into wicked
men.<note place='foot'>De Gigantibus, 2-4.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. As to demons in general, the Talmudists never doubted
their existence, but endeavored to minimize their importance.
They changed the demon <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Azazel</foreign>
into a geographical term by transposing the
letters.<note place='foot'>Sifra Lev. XVI, 8; Yoma, 67 b.</note>
They explained <q>the sons of God
who came to the daughters of men to give birth to the giants
of old</q> as aristocratic Sethites who intermarried with low-class
families of the Cainites.<note place='foot'>See the Ethiopic
<q>Adam and Eve</q>; C. Bezold, <hi rend='italic'>Die Schalzhochle</hi>, p. 18;
comp. Gen. R. XXVI.</note> As to the rest, the entire
belief in demons and ghosts was too deeply rooted in the folk
mind to be counteracted by the rabbis. Even lucid thinkers
of the Middle Ages were caught by these baneful superstitions,
including Jehuda ha Levi, Crescas, and Nahmanides, the
mystic.<note place='foot'>See D. Cassel: <hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>,
p. 402 note.</note> Only a small group fought against this offshoot of
fear and superstition, among them Saadia, Maimonides and
his school, Ibn Ezra, Gersonides, and Juda Ibn Balag. To
Maimonides the demons mentioned in Mishnah and Talmud
are only figurative expressions for physical plagues. He considers
the belief in demons equivalent to a belief in pagan
deities. <q>Many pious Israelites,</q> he
says,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>
III, 29-37, 46; Ibn Ezra to Job I, 6; comp. Finkelscherer:
<hi rend='italic'>Maimunis' Stellung zum Aberglauben</hi>, 1894,
p. 40-51.</note> <q>believe in the
reality of demons and witches, thinking that they should not
be made the object of worship and regard, for the reason that
the Torah has prohibited it. But they fail to see that the
Law commands us to banish all these things from sight, because
they are but falsehood and deceit, as is the whole
idolatry with which they are intrinsically connected.</q>
</p>

<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>

<p>
6. This sound view was disseminated by the rationalistic
school in its contest with the Cabbalah, and has exerted a
wholesome influence upon modern Judaism. Thus Satan is
rejected by Jewish doctrine, while Luther and Calvin, the
Reformers of the Christian Church, still believed in him.
Milton's <q>Paradise Lost</q> placed him in the very foreground
of Christian belief, and the leaders of the Protestant Churches,
up to the present, accord him a prominent place in their
scheme of salvation, as the opponent and counterpart of God.
In his work on Christian dogmatics, David Friedrich Strauss
observes acutely: <q>The whole (Christian) idea of the Messiah
and his kingdom must necessarily have as its counterpart a
kingdom of demons with a personal ruler at its head; without
this it is no more possible than the north pole of the magnet
would be without a south pole. If Christ has come to destroy
the works of the Devil, there would be no need for him to
come, unless there were a Devil. On the other hand, if the
Devil is to be considered merely the personification of evil,
then a Christ who would be only the personification of the
ideal, but not a real personality, would suffice
equally.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Christliche
Glaubenslehre</hi>, II, 18.</note>
At present Christian theologians and even philosophers have
recourse to Platonic and Buddhist ideas, that evil is implanted
in the world from which humanity must free itself, and they
thus present Christianity as the <emph>religion of redemption par
excellence</emph>.<note place='foot'>Euken,
<hi rend='italic'>D. Wahrheitsgehalt d. Religion</hi>, p. 384,
402; Bousset, <hi rend='italic'>Wesen d.
Rel.</hi>, p. 239.</note> Over against this, Judaism still maintains that
there is no radical or primitive evil in the world. No power
exists which is intrinsically hostile to God, and from which
man must be redeemed. According to the Jewish conception,
the goodness and glory of God fill both heaven and
earth, while holiness penetrates all of life, bringing matter
and flesh within the realm of the divine. Evil is but the contrast
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
of good, as shade is but the contrast of light. Evil can
be overcome by each individual, as he realizes his own solemn
duty and the divine will. Its only existence is in the field of
morality, where it is a test of man's freedom and power. Evil
is within man, and against it he is to wage the battles of life,
until his victory signalizes the triumph of the divine in his
own nature.<note place='foot'>See H. Cohen:
<hi rend='italic'>Ethik des reinen Willens</hi>, 282 f., 341 f., 428 f., 593:
<q>Eine Macht des Boesen gibt es nur im Mythos.</q> <q>Dieser Mythos fuehrt
folgerichtig sum mythologischen Gottmenschen.</q> M. Joel, in his article,
<q>Der Mosaismus und das Heidenthum,</q> in J. B. j. Gesch. u. Lit, 1904, p. 49-66,
ascribes the belief in demons to Greek influence. He holds that the prophetic
teaching of God's unity was the best bulwark against demonology and
mysticism.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_XXXII'/>
<head>Chapter XXXII. God and the Intermediary Powers</head>

<p>
1. In addition to the angels who carried out God's will
in the universe, the Biblical and post-Biblical literature recognizes
other divine powers which mediate between Him and
the world of man. The more a seer or thinker became conscious
of the spirituality and transcendency of God, the more
he felt the gulf between the infinite Spirit and the world of the
senses. In order to bridge this gap, the Deity was replaced by
one of His manifestations which could appear and act in a
world circumscribed by space and time.<note place='foot'>See
Dillmann, l. c., 341-351; Weber, l. c., 177-190; Bousset, l. c., 336,
346; Davidson, l. c, 36-38, 115-129; Schechter, Aspects, p. 21-45; Schmiedl,
l. c., 35-48; J. E., art. Holy Spirit; Logos; Memra; Metatron; Name of
God; Shekinah; Enc. Rel. and Eth., I, 308-312.</note> As we found in
prophecy the direct revelation of God giving way to a mediating
angel, so either <q>the Glory</q> or <q>the Name</q> of JHVH
takes the place of God himself. That is, instead of God's
own being, His reflected radiance or the power invested in
His name descends from on high. The rabbis kept the direct
revelation of God for the hallowed past or the desired future,
but at the same time they needed a suitable term for the
presence of God; they therefore coined the word
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shekinah</foreign>&mdash;<q>the
divine Condescension</q> or <q>Presence</q>&mdash;to be used
instead of the Deity himself. Thus the verse of the
Psalm:<note place='foot'>Ps. LXXXII, 1.</note>
<q>God standeth in the congregation of God,</q> is translated by
the Targum, <q>The divine Presence (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shekinah</foreign>)
resteth upon
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
the congregation of the godly.</q> Instead of the conclusion of
the speech to Moses, <q>Let them make Me a sanctuary, that
I may dwell among them,</q><note place='foot'>Ex. XXV,
8.</note> the Targum has, <q>And I shall
let My Presence (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shekinah</foreign>)
dwell among them.</q> Thus in the view of the rabbis
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shekinah</foreign> represents the visible part of
the divine majesty, which descends from heaven to earth,
and on the radiance of which are fed the spiritual beings,
both angels and the souls of the saints.<note place='foot'>Ber.
17 a.</note> God himself was
wrapped in light, whose brilliancy no living being, however
lofty, could endure; but the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shekinah</foreign> or reflection of the
divine glory might be beheld by the elect either in their lifetime
or in the hereafter. In this way the rabbis solved many
contradictory passages of Scripture, some of which speak of
God as invisible, while others describe man as beholding
Him.<note place='foot'>See Ber., l. c., Rab's reference to Ex. XXIV, 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. Just as the references to God's appearing to man suggested
luminous powers mediating the vision of God, so the
passages which represent God as speaking suggest powers
mediating the voice. Hence arose the conception of the
divine <emph>Word</emph>, invested with divine powers both physical and
spiritual. The first act of God in the Bible is that He spoke,
and by this word the world came into being. The <emph>Word</emph> was
thus conceived of as the first created being, an intermediary
power between the Spirit of the world and the created world
order. The word of God, important in the cosmic order, is
still more so in the moral and spiritual worlds. The Word
is at times a synonym of divine revelation to the men of the
early generations or to Israel, the bearer of the Law. Hence
the older Haggadah places beside the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shekinah</foreign> the divine
<emph>Word</emph> (Hebrew, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Maamar</foreign>;
Aramaic, <foreign rend='italic'>Memra</foreign>; Greek,
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Logos</foreign>) as
the intermediary force of revelation.
</p>

<p>
Contact with the Platonic and Stoic philosophies led
gradually to a new development which appears in Philo. The
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
Word or Logos becomes <q>the first-created Son of God,</q> having
a personality independent from God; in fact he is a kind of
vice regent of God himself. From this it was but a short step
toward considering him a partner and peer of the Almighty,
as was done by the Church with its doctrine that the Word
became flesh in Christ, the son of God.<note place='foot'>John
I, 1-6.</note> In view of this the
rabbinical schools gave up the idea of the personified Word,
replacing it with the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Torah</foreign>
or the <emph>Spirit of God</emph>. The older
term was retained only in liturgical formulas, such as: <q>Who
created the heavens by His Word,</q> or, <q>Who by His Word
created the twilight and by Wisdom openeth the gates of
heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Singer's
<hi rend='italic'>Prayerbook</hi>, p. 96, 292.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. As has been shown above,<note place='foot'>Ch.
<ref target='Chapter_XXII'>XXII</ref>. See Prov. VIII, 22.</note> Wisdom is described in the
Bible as the first of all created beings, the assistant and counselor
of God in the work of creation. Then we see that Ben
Sira identifies Wisdom with the Torah.<note place='foot'>XXIV, 9 f.</note> Thus the Torah,
too, was raised to a cosmic power, the sum and substance of
all wisdom. In fact, the Torah, like the Logos of Plato, was
regarded as comprising the ideas or prototypes of all things
as in a universal plan. The Torah is the divine pattern for
the world. In such a connection <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Torah</foreign>
is far from meaning the Law, as Weber
asserts.<note place='foot'>Weber, l. c., 197 f.</note> It means rather the heavenly
book of instruction which contains all the wisdom of the ages,
and which God himself used as guide at the Creation. God is
depicted as an architect with His plan drafted before He began
the erection of the edifice,&mdash;a conception which avoids all
danger of deifying the Logos.
</p>

<p>
4. Several other conceptions, however, do not belong at all
to the intermediary powers, where Weber places
them.<note place='foot'>L. c., 178 f.</note> This
applies to <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Metatron</foreign>
(identical with the Persian Mithras),<note place='foot'>See Kohut:
<hi rend='italic'>Jued, Angelologie</hi>, 36-38; Schorr: He Halutz, VIII, 3;
J. E., art. Merkabah.</note>
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
whom the mystic lore calls the charioteer of the heavenly
throne-chariot, represented by the rabbis as the highest of
the angels, leader of the heavenly hosts, and vice-regent of
God. That no cosmic power was ascribed to him is proved
by the very fact of his identification with Enoch, whom the
pre-Talmudic Haggadah describes as taken up into heaven
and changed into an angel of the highest rank, standing near
God's throne.<note place='foot'>See Targ. Yer. to
Gen. V, 24; J. E., art. Metatron. Comp. Eth. Enoch
LXX, 1, and Slav. Enoch III-XXIV.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. The only real mediator between God and man is the
<emph>Spirit of God</emph>, which is mentioned in connection with both
the creation and divine revelation. In the first chapter of
Genesis the Spirit of God is described as hovering over the
gloom of chaos like the mother bird over the egg, ready to
hatch out the nascent world.<note place='foot'>Gen. I, 2.</note> God breathed His spirit
into the body of man, to make him also
god-like.<note place='foot'>Gen. II, 7; VI, 3; Job XXXII, 8.</note> The prophet
likewise is inspired by the spirit of God to see visions and to
hear the divine message.<note place='foot'>Num. XI, 17
f.; XXIV, 2; XXVII, 18; Ex. XXVIII, 3; XXXI, 3 f.;
Isa. XI, 2; LXI, 1; Ezek. I, 12, 20.</note> Thus the spirit of God has two
aspects; it is the cosmic principle which imbues primal
matter with life; it is a link between the soul of man and God
on high. The view of Ezekiel was but one step from this, to
conceive the spirit as a personal being, and place him beside
God as an angel.
</p>

<p>
The prophets and psalmists, feeling the spirit of God upon
them, considered it an emanation of the Deity. Still, a profounder
insight soon disapproved the severance of the Spirit
of God from God himself, as if He were not altogether <emph>spirit</emph>. Therefore
the accepted term came to be the <emph>Holy Spirit</emph>.<note place='foot'>Isa.
LXIII, 10; Ps. LI, 13.</note>
In this form, however, his personality became more distinct
and his separate existence more defined. Henceforth he is
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
the messenger of God, performing miracles or causing them,
speaking in the place of God, or defending His people Israel.
Nay, more, the Holy Spirit is supposed to have dictated the
words of Scripture to the sacred writers, and to have inspired
the Men of the Great Synagogue in collecting the sacred
writings into a canon.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Holy Spirit.</note>
</p>

<p>
Moreover, the workings of the Holy Spirit continued long
after the completion of the Biblical canon. All the chief
institutions of the Synagogue originally claimed that they
were prompted by the Holy Spirit, resting upon the leaders of
the community. This claim was basic to the authority of
tradition and the continuity of the authority of Jewish
lore. It seems, however, that certain abuses were caused by
miracle-workers who disseminated false doctrines under the
alleged inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Therefore the rabbis
restricted such claims to ancient times and insisted more
strongly than ever upon the preservation of the traditional
lore. For a time a substitute was found in the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Bath Kol</foreign>
(<q>Echo</q> or <q>Whisper of a heavenly voice</q>), but this also
was soon discredited by the schools.<note place='foot'>See
J. E. art., Bath Kol.</note> Obviously the rabbis
desired to avert the deification of either the Holy Spirit or
the Word. Sound common sense was their norm for interpreting
the truth of the divine revelation. In other words,
they relied on God alone as the living force in the development
of Judaism.
</p>

<p>
6. But some sort of mediation was ascribed to several
other spiritual forces. First, the <emph>Name</emph> of God often takes
the place of God himself.<note place='foot'>See Tos.
Sota XIII, 2; XXLV, 11; compare Levy: W. B., <hi rend='italic'>Shem;</hi> Geiger:
<hi rend='italic'>Urschrift</hi>, 273 f.</note> When the name of the Deity was
called over some hallowed spot, the worshipers felt that the
presence of God also was bound up with the sacred
place.<note place='foot'>Deut. XII, 5, 11; II Sam. XII,
28; Neh. I, 9; Jer. VII, 12, 14.</note>
</p>

<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>

<p>
<q>My name is in him,</q> says God of the angel whom He sends
to lead the people.<note place='foot'>Ex.
XXIII, 21.</note> The invocation of the name was believed
to have an actual influence upon the Deity. Furthermore,
since God is frequently represented as swearing by His own
name,<note place='foot'>Jer. XLIV, 26; Isa.
XLV, 23.</note> this ineffable name was invested with magic powers,
as if God himself dwelt therein.<note place='foot'>Midr.
Teh. to Ps. XXXVIII, 8; XCI, 8.</note> Thus it came to be used
as a talisman by the popular saints.<note place='foot'>Taan.
III, 8.</note> Indeed, God is described
as conjuring the depths of the abyss by His holy
name, lest they overflow their
boundaries.<note place='foot'>Prayer of Manasses, 3.</note> Moreover, the
Name, like the Word, or Logos, was regarded as a creative
power, so that we are told that before the world was created
there were only God and His holy Name.<note place='foot'>P.
d. R. El. III.</note> Owing to the
introduction of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Adonai</foreign>
(the Lord) for JHVH, the pronunciation
of the Name fell into oblivion and the Name itself became
a mystery; therefore its cosmic element also was lost
and it dropped into the sphere of mystic and philosophical
speculation.
</p>

<p>
7. Another attribute of God which received some attention,
owing to the frequent mention of the omnipotence of God in
the Bible, was <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ha Geburah</foreign>
(the Power). A familiar rabbinic
expression is: <q>We have heard from the mouth of the Power,</q>
that is, from the divine omnipotence.<note place='foot'>See
Levy: W. B., <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Geburah</foreign>.</note> Two fundamental
principles were early perceived in the moral order of the
world: the punitive justice and compassion of God. These
were taken as the meanings of the two most common Biblical
names of God, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>JHVH</foreign>
and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign>. Elohim, being occasionally
used in dispensing justice,<note place='foot'>Ex.
XXI, 6.</note> was thought to signify God
in His capacity as Judge of the whole earth, and hence as the
divine Justice. JHVH, on the other hand, meant the divine
mercy, as it was used in the revelation of the long-suffering
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
and merciful God to Moses after the sin of Israel before the
golden calf.<note place='foot'>Ex. XXXIV, 5
f.</note> Thus both the rabbis and Philo<note place='foot'>Gen. R.
XXI, 8; Targ. Ps. LVI, 11, and see Siegfried: <hi rend='italic'>Philo</hi>,
213 f.</note> often speak of
these two attributes, justice and mercy, as though they constituted
independent beings, deliberating with God as to what He
should do. The Midrash tells in a parable how before the
creation of man, Justice, Mercy, Truth, and Peace were called
in by God as His counselors to deliberate whether or no man
should be created.<note place='foot'>Gen. R. VIII, 5, after Ps. LXXXV, 11-12.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. One Haggadah concludes from the passage about Creation
in Proverbs, that there are three creative powers, Wisdom,
Understanding, and Knowledge.<note place='foot'>P. d. R. El.
III; Midr. Teh. Ps. L, 1, ref. to Prov. III, 19-20.</note> Another derives from
Scripture seven creative principles: Knowledge, Understanding,
Might, Grace and Mercy, Justice and Rebuke;<note place='foot'>A.
d. R. N. XXXVII, ref. to Prov. III, 19 f.; Ps. LXV, 7; LXXXV, 21-22;
Job XXVII, 11.</note> and
seven attributes which do service before God's throne: Wisdom,
Judgment and Justice, Grace and Mercy, Truth and
Peace.<note place='foot'>Ref. to Hosea II, 21-22.</note>
By combining these lists of three and seven this was
finally enlarged to ten, which became the basis for the entire
mystic lore. Thus the Babylonian master Rab enumerates
ten creative principles: Wisdom, Understanding, and Knowledge,
Might and Power, Rebuke, Justice and Righteousness,
Love and Mercy.<note place='foot'>Hag. 12 a.</note> It
is hard to say whether the ten attributes
of the Haggadah are at all connected with the ten
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Sefiroth</foreign>
(cosmic forces or circles) of the Cabbalah. These last are
hardly the creation of pure monotheism, but rather emanations
from the infinite, conceived after the pattern of heathen
ideas.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Sefiroth, the Ten; Yezirah, Sefer.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. The assumption of all these intermediaries aimed
chiefly to spiritualize the conception of God and to elevate
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
Him above all child-like, anthropomorphic views, so that He
becomes a free Mind ruling the whole universe. At the same
time, it became natural to ascribe material substance to these
intermediaries. As they filled the chasm between the supermundane
Deity and the world of the senses, they had to
share the nature of both matter and mind. Hence the
Shekinah and the Holy Spirit are described by both the rabbis
and the medieval philosophers as a fine, luminous, or ethereal
substance.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Shekinah;
<hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>, II, 4; IV, 3.</note>
The entire ancient and medieval systems were
modeled after the idea of a ladder leading up, step by step,
from the lowest to the highest sphere; God, the Most High,
being at the same time above the highest rung of the ladder
and yet also a part of the whole.
</p>

<p>
10. Our modern system of thought holds the relation of
God to nature and man to be quite different from all this.
To our mind God is the only moral and spiritual power of life.
He is mirrored in the moral and spiritual as well as intellectual
nature of man, and therefore is near to the human
conscience, owing to the divine forces within man himself.
Not the world without, but the world within leads us to God
and tells us what God is. Hence we need no intermediary
beings, and they all evaporate before our mental horizon like
mist, pictures of the imagination without objective reality.
Ibn Ezra says in the introduction to his commentary on the
Bible that the human reason is the true intermediating angel
between God and man, and we hold this to be true of both
the intellect and the conscience. For the theologian and the
student of religion to-day the center of gravity of religion is
to be sought in psychology and anthropology. In all his
upward striving, his craving and yearning for the highest and
the best, in his loftiest aspirations and ideals, man, like Isaiah
the prophet, can behold only the hem of God's garment; he
seeks God above him, because he feels Him within himself.
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
He must pass, however, through the various stages of growth,
until his self-knowledge leads to the knowledge of the God
before whom he kneels in awe. Then finally he feels Him
as his Father, his Educator in the school of life, the Master
of the universal plan in which the individual also has a place
in building up the divine kingdom of truth, justice, and holiness
on earth. For centuries he groped for God, until he
received a Book to serve as <q>a lamp to his feet and a light to
his path,</q> to interpret to him his longing and his craving.
Israel's Book of Books must ever be re-read and re-interpreted
by Israel, the keeper of the book, through ages yet to come.
Well may we say: the mediator between God and the world
is <emph>man</emph>, the son of God; the mediator between God and
humanity is <emph>Israel</emph>, the people of God.
</p>


</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part II. Man</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXXIII. Man's Place in Creation</head>

<p>
1. The doctrine concerning man is inseparably connected
with that about God. Heathenism formed its deities after
the image of man; they were merely human beings of a larger
growth. Judaism, on the contrary, asserts that God is
beyond comparison with mankind; He is a purely spiritual
being without form or image, and therefore utterly unlike
man. On the other hand, man has a divine nature, as he
was made in the image of God, fashioned after His likeness.
The highest and deepest in man, his mental, moral, and spiritual
life, is the reflection of the divine nature implanted within
him, a force capable of ever greater development toward
perfection. This unique distinction among all creatures gives
man the highest place in all creation.
</p>

<p>
2. The superiority of the human race is expressed differently
in various passages in Scripture. According to the first chapter
of Genesis the whole work of creation finds its culmination
in man, whose making is introduced by a solemn appeal
of God to the hosts of heaven: <q>Let us make man in our
image, after our likeness.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. I, 26,
and the commentaries.</note> This declaration proclaimed
that man was the completion and the climax of the physical
creation, as well as the beginning of a new order of creation,
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
a world of moral aims and purposes, of self-perfection and self-control.
In the world of man all life is placed at the service
of a higher ideal, after the divine pattern.
</p>

<p>
The second chapter of Genesis depicts man's creation
differently. Here he appears as the first of created beings,
leading a life of perfect innocence in the garden of divine bliss.
Before him God brings all the newly created beings that he
may give them a name and a purpose. But the Serpent enters
Paradise as tempter, casting the seed of discord into the
hearts of the man and the woman. As they prove too feeble
to resist temptation, they can no longer remain in the heavenly
garden in their former happy state. Only the memory of
Paradise remains, a golden dream to cast hope over the life
of struggle and labor into which they enter. The idea of the
legend is that man's proper place is not among beings of
the earth, but he can reach his lofty destiny only by arduous
struggle with the world of the senses and a constant striving
toward the divine. The same idea is expressed more directly
in the eighth Psalm:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>What is man, that Thou art mindful of him?</q></l>
<l>And the son of man, that Thou thinkest of him?</l>
<l>Yet Thou hast made him but little lower than the godly beings (Elohim)</l>
<l>And hast crowned him with glory and honor.</l>
<l>Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of Thy hands;</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Thou hast put all things under his feet.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
3. According to the Haggadists,<note place='foot'>Gen.
R. VIII, 9.</note> before the fall man excelled
even the angels in appearance and wisdom, so that
they were ready to prostrate themselves before him. Only
when God caused a deep sleep to fall upon man, they recognized
his frailty and kinship with other beings of the earth.
The idea expressed in this legend resembles the one implied
in the legend of Paradise, viz. man has a twofold nature.
With his heavenly spirit he can soar freely to the highest
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
realm of thought, above the station of the angels; yet his
earthly frame holds him ever near the dust. It is this very
contrast that constitutes his greatness, for it makes him a
citizen of two worlds, one perishable, the other eternal. He is
the highest result of Creation, the pride of the
Creator.<note place='foot'>Gen. R. XIV, 1.</note>
Thus he was appointed God's vice-regent on earth by the
words spoken to the first man and woman: <q>Be fruitful,
and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it; and
have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of
the air, and over every living thing that creepeth upon the
earth.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. I, 28.</note>
The rabbis add a striking comment upon the word
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>R'du</foreign>,
which is used here for <q>have dominion</q> but which may
also mean, <q>go down.</q> They say: <q>The choice is left in
man's own hand. If you maintain your heaven-born dignity,
you will have dominion over all things; if not, you will descend
to the level of the brute creation.</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
R. VIII, 12; P. d. R. El., XI.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. An ancient Mishnah derives a significant lesson from
the story of the creation of man<note place='foot'>Sanh.
IV, 5, correctly preserved in the Yerushalmi, and the addition in
the Babli, <foreign rend='italic'>Me Yisrael</foreign>,
ought not to have been inserted by Schechter, Ab. d.
R.N., p. 90.</note>: <q>Both the vegetable and
animal worlds were created in multitudes. Man alone was
created as a single individual in order that he may realize
that he constitutes a world in himself, and carries within
him the true value of life. Hence each human being is entitled
to say: <q>The whole world was created for my sake.</q>
He who saves a single human life is as one who saves a whole
world, and he who destroys a single human life is as one
who destroys a whole world.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. While it is man's spiritual side which is the image of
God, yet he derives all his powers and faculties from earthly
life, just as a tree draws its strength from the soil in which it
is rooted. Judaism does not consider the soul the exclusive
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
seat of the divine, as opposed to the body. In fact, Judaism
admits no complete dualism of spirit and matter, however
striking some aspects of their contrast may be. The whole
human personality is divine, just so far as it asserts its freedom
and molds its motives toward a divine end. In recognition
of this fact Hillel claimed reverence for the human
body as well as mind, comparing it to the homage rendered
to the statue of a king, for man is made in the image of God,
the King of all the world.<note place='foot'>Lev.
R. XXXIV, 3.</note> Thus the Greek idea that man is a
<emph>microcosm</emph>, a world in miniature, reflecting the cosmos on a
smaller scale, was expressed in the Tannaitic schools
as well.<note place='foot'>Ab. d. R. N. XXXI.</note>
The stamp of divinity is borne by man in his entire heaven-aspiring
nature, as he strives to elevate the very realm of the
senses into the sphere of morality and holiness.
</p>

<p>
6. In this respect the Jewish view parts from that of Plato
and the Hindu philosophers. These divide man into a pure
celestial soul and an impure earthly body and hold that the
physical life is tainted by sin, while the spirit is divine only
in so far as it frees itself from its prison house of flesh. Judaism,
on the other hand, emphasizes the unified character
of man, by which he can bend all his faculties and functions
to a godlike mastery over the material world. This appears
first in his upright posture and heavenward glance, which
proclaim him master over the whole animal world cowering
before him in lowly dread. His whole bodily structure corresponds
to this, with its constant growth, its wondrous
symmetry, and the unique flexibility of the hands, with which
he can perform ever new and greater achievements. Above
all, we see the nobility of man in his high forehead and receding
jaw, which contrast so strikingly with the structure of
most animals and even with many of the lower races. Indeed,
primitive man could scarcely imagine a nobler pattern by
which to model his deity than the figure of a man.
</p>

<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>

<p>
7. In fact, the Biblical verse, <q>God created man after the
image of the divine beings</q> (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>elohim</foreign>),
was originally taken literally, in the sense that angels posed as models for the
creation of man.<note place='foot'>See Jubilees
XV, 27; comp. Gen. R. VIII, 7-9; Ab. d. R. N., ed. Schechter,
p. 153.</note> The phrase was referred to the spiritual,
god-like nature of man only when the difference between
material and spiritual things became better understood, and
man obtained a clearer knowledge of himself. Man grew to
feel that his craving for the perfect, whether in the field of
truth and right, or of beauty, is the force which lifts him, in
spite of all his limitations, into the realm of the divine. His
soaring imagination and ceaseless longing for perfection disclose
before his eyes a partial vista of the infinite. The human
spirit carries mortal man above the confines of time and space
into those boundless realms where God resides in lonely
majesty.<note place='foot'>See Jellinek:
<hi rend='italic'>Bezelem Elohim;</hi> Philippson, l. c., II, 58-72; Dillmann, l. c.,
325. The words of Plato (<hi rend='italic'>State</hi>, X, 613,
and <hi rend='italic'>Theætetos</hi>, 176), <q>Man should
strive for God-likeness through virtue, and be holy, righteous and wise like the
Deity,</q> may have influenced the ethical interpretation of the Biblical term.</note>
</p>

<p>
Man did not emanate perfect from the hand of the Creator,
but ready for an ever greater perfection. Being the last of
all created beings, as the Midrash says, he can be put to
shame by the smallest insect, which is prior to him. Yet
before the beginning of creation a light shone upon his spirit
that has illumined his achievements through untold
generations.<note place='foot'>Gen. R. VIII, 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. The resemblance of man to God is attributed also to
his free will and self-consciousness, by which he claims moral
dignity and mastery over all things.<note place='foot'>See
Gen. I, 26; Comm. of Rashi, Saadia, Ibn Ezra, Nahmanides, and Ob.
Sforno.</note> Still, all these superior
qualities which we call human are not ready-made endowments,
free gifts bestowed by God; they are simply potentialities
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
which may be gradually developed. Man must
strive to attain the place destined for him in the scheme of
creation by the exertion of his own will and the unfolding of
the powers that lie within him. The impulse toward self-perfection,
which is constantly stimulated by the desire to
overcome obstacles and to extend one's power, knowledge,
and possessions, forms the kernel of the divine in man. This
is the <q>spirit in man, and the breath of the Almighty, that
giveth them understanding.</q><note place='foot'>Job
XXXII, 8.</note> Thus the teaching of modern
science, of the gradual ascent of man through all the stages
of animal life, does not impair the lofty position in creation
which Judaism has assigned him. Plant and animal are what
they have always been, children of the earth; man with his
heaven-aspiring soul is the image of his Creator, a child of
God. Giver of name and purpose to all things about him,
he ranks above the angels; he <q>marches on while all the rest
stand still.</q><note place='foot'>Zach. III, 7; see comm.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_XXXIV'/>
<head>Chapter XXXIV. The Dual Nature of Man</head>

<p>
1. According to Jewish doctrines, man is formed by a
union of two natures: the flesh, which he shares with all the
animals, and the spirit, which renders him a child of God.
The former is rooted in the earth and is earthward bent; the
latter is a <q>breath from God</q> and strives to unfold the divine
in man until he attains the divine image. This discord brings
a tremendous internal conflict, leading from one historic
stage to another, achieving ever higher things, intellectual,
moral, and spiritual, until at last the whole earth is to be a
divine kingdom, the dwelling-place of truth, goodness, and
holiness.
</p>

<p>
2. According to the Biblical view man consists of flesh
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>basar</foreign>) and spirit
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ruah</foreign>). The term flesh is used impartially
of all animals, hence the Biblical term <q>all flesh</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
VI, 12, 19.</note>
includes both man and beast. The body becomes a living
being by being penetrated with the <q>breath of life</q>
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ruah
hayim</foreign>), at whose departure the living body turns at once into
a lifeless clod. This breath of life is possessed by the animal
as well as by man, as both of them breathe the air. Hence
in ancient tongues <q>breath</q> and <q>soul</q> are used as synonyms,
as the Hebrew <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>nefesh</foreign> and
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>neshamah</foreign>, the Latin
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>anima</foreign> and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>spiritus</foreign>, the Greek
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>pneuma</foreign> and
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>psyche</foreign>. A different primitive
belief connected the soul with the blood, noting that man or
beast dies when the hot life-blood flows out of the body, so
that we read in the Bible, <q>the blood is the soul.</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
IX, 21; Lev. XVII, 11, 14.</note> In this
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
the soul is identified with the life, while the word
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ruah</foreign>, denoting
the moving force of the air, is used more in the sense
of spirit or soul as distinct from the body.
</p>

<p>
Thus both man and beast possess a soul,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>nefesh</foreign>. The soul
of man is merely distinguished by its richer endowment, its
manifold faculties by which it is enabled to move forward to
higher things. Thus the animal soul is bound for all time to
its destined place, while the divine spirit in man makes him
a free creative personality, self-conscious and god-like. For
this reason the creation of man forms a special act in the
account in Genesis. Both the plant and animal worlds rose
at God's bidding from the soil of mother earth, and the soul
of the animal is limited in origin and goal by the earthly
sphere. The creation of man inaugurates a new world. God
is described as forming the body of man from the dust of the
earth and then breathing His spirit into the lifeless frame,
endowing it with both life and personality. The whole man,
both body and soul, has thus the potentiality of a higher and
nobler life.
</p>

<p>
3. Accordingly Scripture does not have a thorough-going
dualism, of a carnal nature which is sinful and a spiritual
nature which is pure. We are not told that man is composed
of an impure earthly body and a pure heavenly soul, but instead
that the whole of man is permeated by the spirit of God.
Both body and soul are endowed with the power of continuous
self-improvement. In order to see the great superiority
of the Jewish view over the heathen one, we need
only study the old Babylonian legend preserved by Berosus.
In this the deity made man by mixing earth with some of its
own life-blood, thus endowing the human soul with higher
powers. In the Bible the difference between man and beast
does not lie in the blood, although the blood is still thought
to be the life. The distinction of man is in the spirit,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ruah</foreign>,
which emanates from God and penetrates both body and soul,
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
lifting the whole man into a higher realm and making him a
free moral personality.
</p>

<p>
Still the Bible makes no clear distinction between the three
terms, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>nefesh</foreign>,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>neshamah</foreign>, and
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ruah</foreign>.<note place='foot'>See Dillmann,
l. c., 355-361; Davidson, l. c., 182-203; comp. Gen. R.
XIV, 11, where these three terms are given, and also
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>yehidah</foreign>, Ps. XXII, 21;
XXXV, 17, and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hayah</foreign>, Ps.
XCLIII, 3; Job XXXIII, 1.</note> Philo first distinguished
between three different substances of the soul, but his theory
was the Platonic one, for which he simply used the three
Biblical names.<note place='foot'>De Leg. Alleg.
III, 38.</note> The Jewish philosophers of the Middle Ages,
beginning with Saadia, took the same attitude, even though
they realized more or less that the division of the soul into
three substances has no Scriptural warrant.<note place='foot'>See Horovitz:
<hi rend='italic'>D. Psychologie Saadias</hi>; Scheyer: <hi rend='italic'>D.
psycholog. System d. Maimonides</hi>; Cassel's <hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>,
p. 382-400; Husik, l. c., IX, 41; and see also
Index: <emph>Soul</emph>.</note> In rabbinical
literature this division is scarcely known, and there is little
mention of either the animal soul, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>nefesh</foreign>,
or the vital spark,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ruah</foreign>.
Instead the word <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>neshamah</foreign> is used for the human
<emph>psyche</emph> as the higher spiritual substance, and the contrast to
it is not the Biblical <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>basar</foreign>,
flesh, but the Aramaic <foreign rend='italic'>guph</foreign>,
body.<note place='foot'>Sanh. 91 a, b; Nid. 30 b-31 b; Sifre Deut. 306, ref. to Deut.
XXXII, 1; Lev. IV, 5-8.</note>
This bears a trace of Persian dualism, with its strong contrast
between the earthly body and the heavenly soul.
</p>

<p>
4. In fact, rabbinical Judaism does not recognize any
relationship between the soul of the animal and that of man,
but claims that man has a special type of existence. The
Midrash tells<note place='foot'>Ab. Z. 5
a; Gen. R. VIII, 1.</note> that God formed Adam's body so as to reach
from earth to heaven, and then caused the soul to enter it.
In the same way God implants the soul into the embryo before
its birth and while in the womb. Before this the soul had a bird-like
existence in an immense celestial cage
(<foreign rend='italic'>guph</foreign> = <foreign rend='italic'>columbarium</foreign>),
and when it leaves the body in death, it again takes
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
its flight toward heaven. There its conduct on earth will
reap a reward in the garden of eternal bliss or a punishment
in the infernal regions. The belief in the preëxistence of the
soul was shared by the rabbis with the apocryphal authors
and Philo.<note place='foot'>B. Wisdom, VIII, 20;
Slav. Enoch XXIII, 5; Philo I, 15, 32; II, 356;
comp. Bousset, l. c., p. 508 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
However, rabbinical Judaism never followed Philo so far
in the footsteps of Plato as to consider the body or the flesh
the source of impurity and sin, or <q>the prison house of the
soul.</q> This view is fundamental in the Paulinian system of
other-worldliness. For the rabbis the sensuous desire of the
body (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>yezer</foreign>)
is a tendency toward sin, but never a compulsion.
The weakness of the flesh may cause a straying from
the right path, but man can turn the desires of the flesh into
the service of the good. He can always assert his divine
power of freedom by opposing the evil inclination
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>yezer ha ra</foreign>) with the good inclination
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>yezer ha tob</foreign>) to overcome
it.<note place='foot'>Gen. VI, 5; VIII, 21; B. Sira XV, 14; XVII, 31; XXI, 11; Ber. 5 a;
Kid. 30 b; Suk. 52 a, b; Shab. 152 b; Eccl. R. XII, 7; comp. F. Ch. Porter:
<q>The Yezer ha Ra</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Biblical and Semitic Studies</hi>, 93-156;
Bousset, l. c., 462 f.</note> In fact, the rabbis are so far from acknowledging the
existence of a compulsion of evil in the flesh, that they point
to the history of great men as proof that the highest characters
have the mightiest passions in their souls, and that their
greatness consists in the will by which they have learned to
control themselves.<note place='foot'>Suk. 52 a, b.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. In the light of modern science the whole theory separating
body and soul falls to the ground, and the one connecting
man more closely with the animal world is revived. In
this connection we think of the idea which medieval thinkers
adopted from Plato and Aristotle, that there is a substance of
souls&mdash;<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>nefesh hahiyonith</foreign>&mdash;which
forms the basic life-force
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
of men and animals. Physiology and psychology reveal
the interaction and dependence of body and soul in the
lowest forms of animal life as well as in the higher forms, including
man. The beginnings of the human mind must be
sought once for all in the animal, just as the origin of the
animal reaches back into the plant world. Indeed, Aristotle
anticipates the discoveries of modern science, placing
the vegetative and animal souls beside the spirit of man.
Thus motion and sensibility form the lower boundary-line
of the animal kingdom, and self-consciousness and self-determination
are the criteria of humanity.
</p>

<p>
Yet this very self-conscious freedom which forms man's
personality, his <emph>ego</emph>, lifts him into a realm of free action under
higher motives, transcending nature's law of necessity, and
therefore not falling within the domain of natural science.
Dust-born man, notwithstanding his earthly limitations, in
spite of his kinship to mollusk and mammal, enters the realm
of the divine spirit. In the Midrash the rabbis remark that
man shares the nature of both animals and
angels.<note place='foot'>Gen. R. VIII, 11.</note> Admitting
this, we feel that he is tied neither to heaven nor to the
earth, but free to lift himself above all creatures or sink below
them all.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Chapter_XXXIV_Section_6'/>
6. Endowed with this dual nature, man stands in the very
center of the universe, and God esteems him <q>equal in
value to the entire creation,</q> as Rabbi Nehemiah says of a
single human soul.<note place='foot'>Ab. d.
R. N. XXXI.</note> Rabbi Akiba stresses the image of God
in humanity when he says: <q>Beloved is man, for he is created
in God's image, and it was a special token of love that
he became conscious of it. Beloved is Israel, for they are
called the children of God, and it was a special token of love
that they became conscious of it.</q><note place='foot'>Aboth
III, 18.</note> The Midrash compares
man to God in exquisite manner: <q>Just as God permeates
the world and carries it, unseen yet seeing all, enthroned
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
within as the Only One, the Perfect, and the Pure, yet never
to be reached or found out; so the soul penetrates and carries
the body, as the <emph>one</emph> pure and luminous being which sees and
holds all things, while itself unseen and
unreached.</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 10 a; Midr. Teh. Ps. CIII, 4-5.</note> The
conception of the soul is here divested of every sensory attribute,
and portrayed as a divine force within the body. This
conception, which was accepted by the medieval philosophers,
is thoroughly consistent with our view of the world. The
soul it is which mirrors both the material and spiritual worlds
and holds them in mutual relation through its own power.
It is at the same time swayed upward and downward by its
various cravings, heavenly and earthly, and this very tension
constitutes the dual nature of the human soul.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXXV. The Origin and Destiny of Man</head>

<p>
1. Of all created beings man alone possesses the power of
self-determination; he assigns his destiny to himself. While
he endeavors to find the object of all other things and even of
his own existence in the world, he finds his own purpose within
himself. Star and stone, plant and beast fulfill their purpose
in the whole plan of creation by their existence and varied
natures, and are accordingly called <q>good</q> as they are.
Man, however, realizes that he must accomplish his purpose
by his manner of life and the voluntary exertion of his own
powers. He is <q>good</q> only as far as he fulfills his destiny
on earth. He is not good by mere existence, but by his
conduct. Not what he is, but what he ought to be gives
value to his being. He is good or bad according to the direction
of his will and acts by the imperative: <q>I ought</q> or
<q>I ought not,</q> which comes to him in his conscience, the voice
of God calling to his soul.
</p>

<p>
2. The problem of human destiny is answered by Judaism
with the idea that God is the ideal and pattern of all morality.
The answer given, then, is <q>To walk in the ways of God, to
be righteous and just,</q> as He is.<note place='foot'>Gen.
XVIII, 19; Deut. VIII, 6; X, 12; XXXII, 4.</note> The prophet Micah expressed
it in the familiar words: <q>It has been told thee, O
man, what is good, and what the Lord doth require of thee:
Only to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God.</q><note place='foot'>Micah VI,
8.</note> Accordingly the Bible considers men of
the older generations the prototypes of moral conduct, <q>righteous
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
men who walked with God.</q> Such men were Enoch,
Noah, and above all Abraham, to whom God said: <q>I am
God Almighty; walk before Me, and be thou whole-hearted.
And I will make My covenant between thee and
Me.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. V. 22; VI, 9; XVII, 1-2.</note>
The rabbis singled out Abraham as the type of a perfect man
on account of his love of righteousness and peace; contrasting
him with Adam who sinned, they beheld him as <q>the great
man among the heroes of the ancient times.</q> They even
considered him the type of true humanity, in whom the
object of creation was attained.<note place='foot'>Gen.
R. XII, 8; XIV, 6, ref. to Josh. XIV, 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. This moral consciousness, however, which tells man to
walk in the ways of God and be perfect, is also the source of
shame and remorse. With such an ideal man must feel constantly
that he falls short, that he is not what he ought to be.
Only the little child, who knows nothing as yet of good and
evil, can preserve the joy of life unmarred. Similarly, primitive
man, being ignorant of guilt, could pass his days without
care or fear. But as soon as he becomes conscious of guilt,
discord enters his soul, and he feels as if he had been driven
from the presence of God.
</p>

<p>
This feeling is allegorized in the Paradise legend. The
garden of bliss, half earthly, half heavenly, which is elsewhere
called the <q>mountain of God,</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. XXVIII, 14.</note> a place of
wondrous trees, beasts, and precious stones, whence the four great rivers
flow, is the abode of divine beings. The first man and woman
could dwell in it only so long as they lived in harmony with
God and His commandments. As soon as the tempter in
the shape of the serpent called forth a discord between the
divine will and human desire, man could no longer enjoy
celestial bliss, but must begin the dreary earthly life, with its
burdens and trials.
</p>

<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>

<p>
4. This story of the fall of the first man is an allegorical
description of the state of childlike innocence which man
must leave behind in order to attain true strength of character.
It is based upon a view common to all antiquity of a
descent of the race; that is: first came the golden age, when
man led a life of ease and pleasure in company with the gods;
then an age of silver, another of brass, and finally the iron age,
with its toil and bitter woe. Thus did evil deeds and wild
passions increase among men. This view fails utterly to
recognize the value of labor as a civilizing force making for
progress, and it contradicts the modern historical view. The
prophets of Israel placed the golden age at the end, not the
beginning of history, so that the purpose of mankind was to
establish a heavenly kingdom upon the earth. In fact, the fall
of man is not referred to anywhere in Scripture and never became
a doctrine, or belief, of Judaism. On the contrary, the
Hellenistic expounders of the Bible take it for granted that
the story is an allegory, and the book of Proverbs understands
the tree of life symbolically, in the verse: <q>She (the
Torah) is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon
her.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. III, 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. Still the rabbis in Talmud and Midrash accepted the
legend in good faith as historical<note place='foot'>Gen.
R. XVI, 10; Shab. 55 b.</note> and took it literally as did
the great English poet:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The fruit</q></l>
<l>Of that forbidden tree whose mortal taste</l>
<l>Brought death into the world, and all our woe,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>With loss of Eden.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In fact, they even followed the Persian dualism with its evil
principle, the primeval serpent, or the Babylonian legend of
the sea-monster Tiamat, and regarded the serpent in Paradise
as a demon. He was identified with Satan, the arch-fiend,
and later with evil in general, the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>yezer ha ra</foreign>.<note place='foot'>B.
B. 15 a.</note> Thus the
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
belief arose that the poisonous breath of the serpent infected
all generations, causing death even of the
sinless.<note place='foot'>Shab. 146 a; Yeb. 103 b; Ab. Zar. 22 b; Shab. 55 b.</note> The
apocrypha also held that the envy of Satan brought death
into the world.<note place='foot'>B. Wisdom,
II, 24.</note> This prepared for the dismal church doctrine
of original sin, the basis of Paul's teachings, which demanded
a blood atonement for curse-laden humanity, and
found it after the pagan pattern in the vicarious sacrifice of
a dying god.<note place='foot'>Romans V, 12 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
Against such perversion of the simple Paradise story the
sound common sense of the Jewish people rebelled. While
the early Talmudists occasionally mention the poisoning of
the human race by the serpent, they find an antidote for the
Jewish people in the covenant with Abraham or that
of Sinai.<note place='foot'>Shab. 146 a.</note>
One cannot, however, discern the least indication of belief in
original sin, either as inherent in the human race or inherited
by them. Nor does the liturgy express any such idea, especially
for the Day of Penitence, when it would certainly be mentioned
if the conception found any place in Jewish doctrine. On
the contrary, the prevailing thought of Judaism is that of Deuteronomy
and Ezekiel,<note place='foot'>Deut. XXIV, 16;
Ezek. XVIII, 4.</note> that <q>Each man dies by his own sin,</q>
that every soul must bear only the consequences of his own
deeds. The rabbis even state that no man dies unless he has
brought it upon himself by his own sin, and mention especially
certain exceptions to this rule, such as the four saintly men
who died without sin,<note place='foot'>Shab. 55
a, b.</note> or certain children whose death was
due to the sin of their parents.<note place='foot'>Shab.
32 b.</note> They could never admit
that the whole human race was so corrupted by the sin of the
first man that it is still in a state of sinfulness.
</p>

<p>
6. Of course, the rabbinical schools took literally the Biblical
story of the fall of man and laid the chief blame upon
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
woman, who fell a prey to the wiles of the serpent. This is
done even by Ben Sira, who says: <q>With woman came the
beginning of sin, and through her we all must
die.</q><note place='foot'>B. Sira XXV, 24.</note> So the
Talmud says that due to woman, man, the crown, light, and
life of creation, lost his purity, his luster, and his
immortality.<note place='foot'>Yer. Shab. II, 5 b.</note>
The Biblical verse, <q>They did eat, and the eyes of them both
were opened,</q> is interpreted by Rabbi Johanan ben Zakkai
and Rabbi Akiba as <q>They saw the dire consequences of their
sin upon all coming generations.</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
R. XIX, 10, ref. to Gen. III, 6-7.</note> The fall of man is treated
most elaborately in the same spirit in the two apocalyptic
books written after the destruction of the Second Temple,
the Apocalypse of Baruch and the IV Book of
Esdras.<note place='foot'>Apoc. Baruch XXIII, 4; XLVIII, 42 f.; LVI, 6; and especially
LIV, 14-19; IV Esdras III, 7; VII, 11, 118.</note> The
incompatibility of divine love with the sufferings of man
and of the Jewish people on account of the sin of the first
man is solved by an appeal to the final Day of Judgment,
and the striking remark is added that, after all, <q>each is his
own Adam and is held responsible for his own sin.</q> We
cannot deny that these two books contain much that is near
the Paulinian view of original sin. It seems, however, that
the Jewish teachers were put on their guard by the emphasis
of this pessimistic dogma by the nascent Church, and did
their best to give a different aspect to the story of the first
sin. Thus they say: <q>If Adam had but shown repentance,
and done penance after he committed his sin, he would have
been spared the death penalty.</q><note place='foot'>Pesik.
160 b; Num. R. XIII, 5.</note> Moreover, they actually
represent Adam and Eve as patterns of repentant sinners,
who underwent severe penance and thus obtained the promise
of divine mercy and also of final resurrection.<note place='foot'>P.
d. R. El., XX; comp. Adam and Eve, I; Erub. 18 b.</note> Instead of
transmitting the heritage of sin to coming generations, the
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
first man is for them an example of repentance. So do the
Haggadists tell us quite characteristically that God merely
wanted to test the first man by an insignificant command,
so that the first representative of the human race should show
whether he was worthy to enter eternal life in his mortal garb,
as did Enoch and Elijah. As he could not stand the test,
he forfeited the marks of divine rank, his celestial radiance,
his gigantic size, and his power to overcome
death.<note place='foot'>Gen. R. XII, 5; XIX, 11; XXI, 4 f.; comp. Shab. 55 b.</note>
Obviously the Biblical story was embellished with material from
the Persian legend of the fall of Yima or Djemshid, the first
man, from superhuman greatness because of his sin,<note place='foot'>See
Windishman: <hi rend='italic'>Zoroastrische Studien</hi>, p. 27 f.</note> but it
was always related frankly as a legend, and could never influence
the Jewish conception of the fall of man.
</p>

<p>
7. Judaism rejects completely the belief in hereditary sin
and the corruption of the flesh. The Biblical verse, <q>God
made man upright; but they have sought out many inventions,</q><note place='foot'>Eccl.
VII, 29.</note> is explained in the Midrash: <q>Upright and just as
is God, He made man after His likeness in order that he might
strive after righteousness, and unfold ever more his god-like
nature, but men in their dissensions have marred the divine
image.</q><note place='foot'>Tanh. Yelamdenu to Gen. III, 22.</note>
With reference to another verse in Ecclesiastes:<note place='foot'>Eccl. XII, 7.</note>
<q>The dust returneth unto the earth as it was, and the spirit
returneth unto God who gave it,</q> the rabbis teach <q>Pure as
the soul is when entering upon its earthly career, so can man
return it to his Maker.</q><note place='foot'>Shab. 152
b.</note> Therefore the pious Jew begins
his daily prayers with the words: <q>My God, the soul which
Thou hast given me is pure.</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 80
a. The rabbis did not have the belief that the body is morally
impure and therefore the seat of the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>yezer ha ra</foreign>, as is stated by Weber, l. c.,
228 f. See Potter, l. c., 98-107; Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>, 242-292.
It is wrong also to explain Ps. LI, 7, <q>Behold I was brought forth in iniquity, and
in sin did my mother conceive me,</q> as inherited sinfulness, as Delitzsch and other
Christian commentators have done, following Ibn Ezra, who refers this to Eve, the
mother of all men. The correct interpretation is given by R. Ahha in Lev. R.
XIV, 5; <q>Every sexual act is the work of sensuality, the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Yezer ha ra</foreign>.</q> Comp.
Yoma 69 b. Needless to say that Hosea VI, 7; Isa. XLIII, 37; Job XXXI, 33
do not refer to the sin of Adam.</note> The life-long battle with
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
sin begins only at the age when sensual desire, <q>the evil inclination,</q>
awakens in youth; then the state of primitive
innocence makes way for the sterner contest for manly virtue
and strength of character.
</p>

<p>
8. In fact, the whole Paradise story could never be made
the basis for a dogma. The historicity of the serpent is denied
by Saadia;<note place='foot'>See Ibn Ezra to Gen.
III, 1.</note> the rabbis transfer Paradise with the tree
of life to heaven as a reward for the future;<note place='foot'>See
Taan. 10 a; Ber. 34 b; D. comp. Enoch XXIX-XXXII; <hi rend='italic'>Seder Gan
Eden</hi>, in Jellinek, <hi rend='italic'>Beth ha Midrash</hi>, II, III.</note> and both
Nahmanides the mystic and Maimonides the philosopher
give it an allegorical meaning.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>,
II, 30; Nahmanides to Gen. III, 1.</note> On the other hand, the Haggadic
teachers perceived the simple truth that a life of indolence
in Paradise would incapacitate man for his cultural
task, and that the toils and struggles inflicted on man as a
curse are in reality a blessing. Therefore they laid special
stress on the Biblical statement: <q>He put man into the
garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it.</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
R. XVI, 8, ref. to Gen. II, 15.</note> The following
parable is especially suggestive: <q>When Adam heard the
stern sentence passed: <q>Thou shalt eat the herb of the field,</q>
he burst into tears, and said: <q>Am I and my ass to eat out of
the same manger?</q> Then came another sentence from God
to reassure him, <q>In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat
bread,</q> and forthwith he became aware that man shall attain
a higher dignity by dint of labor.</q><note place='foot'>Pes. 111 a;
Gen. R. XX, 24.</note> Indeed, labor transforms
the wilderness into a garden and the earth into a habitation
worthy of the son of God. The <q>book of the generations of
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
man</q> which begins with Adam is accordingly not the history
of man's descent, but of his continuous ascent, of ever higher
achievements and aspirations; it is not a record of the fall
of man, but of his rise from age to age. According to the
Midrash<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Seder Olam</hi>
at the close; Gen. R. XXIV, 2.</note> God opened before Adam the book with the deeds
and names of the leading spirits of all the coming generations,
showing him the latent powers of the human intellect and
soul. The phrase, <q>the fall of man,</q> can mean, in fact,
only the inner experience of the individual, who does fall from
his original idea of purity and divine nobility into transgression
and sin. It cannot refer to mankind as a whole, for the
human race has never experienced a fall, nor is it affected by
original or hereditary sin.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXXVI. God's Spirit in Man</head>

<p>
1. Man is placed in an animal world of dull feelings, of
blind and crude cravings. Yet his clear understanding,
his self-conscious will and his aspirations forward and upward
lead him into a higher world where he obtains insight
into the order and unity of all things. By the spirit of God
he is able to understand material things and grasp them in
their relations; thus he can apply all his knowledge and
creative imagination to construct a world of ideals. But this
world, in all its truth, beauty and goodness, is still limited
and finite, a feeble shadow of the infinite world of God. As
the Bible says: <q>The spirit of man is the lamp of the Lord,
searching all the inward parts.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. XX, 27.</note>
<q>It is a spirit in man, and the breath of the Almighty, that
giveth them understanding.</q><note place='foot'>Job XXXII, 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. According to the Biblical conception, the spirit of God
endows men with all their differing capacities; it gives to
one man wisdom by which he penetrates into the causes of
existence and orders facts into a scientific system; to another
the seeing eye by which he captures the secret of beauty and
creates works of art; and to a third the genius to perceive
the ways of God, the laws of virtue, that he may become a
teacher of ethical truth. In other words, the spirit of God
is <q>the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and the fear of
the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XI, 2.</note>
It works upon the scientific interest of the investigator,
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
the imagination of the artist and poet, the ethical
and social sense of the prophet, teacher, statesman, and lawgiver.
Thus their high and holy vision of the divine is brought
home to the people and implanted within them under the inspiration
of God. In commenting upon the Biblical verse,
<q>Wisdom and might are His ... He giveth wisdom to the
wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding,</q><note place='foot'>Dan.
II, 20-21.</note> the sages wisely remark, <q>God carefully selects those who
possess wisdom for His gift of wisdom.</q> Even as a musical
instrument must be attuned for the finer notes that it may have
a clear, resonant tone, so the human soul must be made
especially susceptible to the gifts of the spirit in order to be
capable of unfolding them. Thus the Talmud records an
interesting dialogue on this very passage between a Roman
matron familiar with the Scripture, and Rabbi Jose ben
Halafta. She asked sarcastically, <q>Would it not have been
more generous of your God to have given wisdom to those that
are unwise than to those that already possess it?</q> Thereupon
the Jewish master replied, <q>If you were to lend a precious
ornament, would you not lend it to one who was able to make
use of it? So God gives the treasure of wisdom to the wise,
who know how to appreciate and develop it, not to the unwise,
who do not know its value.</q><note place='foot'>Tanh.
Miketz 9; comp. Tanh. Yelamdenu Wayakhel, where the story is
told differently.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. Thus the diverse gifts of the divine spirit are distributed
differently among the various classes and tribes of men, according
to their capacity and the corresponding task which is
assigned them by Providence. The divine spark is set aglow
in each human soul, sometimes feebly, sometimes brightly,
but it blazes high only in the privileged personality or group.
The mutual relationship between God and man is recognized
by the Synagogue in the Eighteen Benedictions, where the
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
one directly following the three praises of God is devoted to
wisdom and knowledge: <q>Thou favorest man with knowledge,
and teachest mortals understanding. So favor us with
knowledge, understanding, and discernment from Thee.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, gracious Giver of
knowledge.</q><note place='foot'>Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerbook</hi>, p. 46.</note>
This petition, remarks Jehuda ha Levi,<note place='foot'>Cuzari
III, 19.</note> deserves its position
as first among these prayers, because wisdom brings us nearer
to God. It is also noteworthy that the Synagogue prescribes
a special benediction at the sight of a renowned sage, even if
he is not a Jew, reading, <q>Praised be He who has imparted
of His wisdom to flesh and blood.</q><note place='foot'>Ber.
58 a; Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>, p. 291.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. Maimonides holds that in the same degree as a man
studies the works of God in nature, he will be filled with
longing for direct knowledge of God and true love of
Him.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Yesode ha Torah</hi>, II, 2.</note>
<q>Not only religion, but also the sciences emanate from God,
both being the outcome of the wisdom which God imparts
to all nations,</q>&mdash;thus wrote a sixteenth-century rabbi,
Loewe ben Bezalel of Prague, known usually as <q>the eminent
Rabbi Loewe.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Nethibot
Olam</hi>, XIV.</note> The men of the Talmud also accord the
palm in certain types of knowledge to heathen sages, and did
not hesitate to ascribe to some heathens the highest knowledge
of God in their time.<note place='foot'>Pes. 94 b.</note> As a mystic of the thirteenth
century, Isaac ben Latif, says: <q>That faith is the most perfect
which perceives truth most fully, since God is the source
of all truth.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Shaare
Shamayim</hi>, IV, 3.</note> Of the two heads of the Babylonian academies,
Rab and Samuel, one asserted that Moses through his
prophetic genius reached forty-nine of the fifty degrees of
the divine understanding (as the fiftieth is reserved for God
alone), while the other claimed the same distinction for King
Solomon as the result of his wisdom.<note place='foot'>R. h. Sh. 21 b.</note>
</p>

<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>

<p>
5. Thus the spirit of God creates in man both consciously
and unconsciously a world of ideas, which proves him a being
of a higher order in creation. This impulse may work actively,
searching, investigating, and creating, or passively as an
instrument of a higher power. At first it is a dim, uncertain
groping of the spirit; then the mind acquires greater lucidity
by which it illumines the dark world; and, as one question
calls for the other and one thought suggests another, the
world of ideas opens up as a well-connected whole. Thus
man creates by slow steps his languages, the arts and sciences,
ethics, law and all the religions with their varying practices
and doctrines. At times this spirit bursts forth with greater
vehemence in great men, geniuses who lift the race with one
stroke to a higher level. Such men may say, in the words
of David, the holy singer: <q>The spirit of the Lord spoke by
me, and His word was upon my tongue.</q><note place='foot'>II
Sam. XXIII, 2.</note> They may repeat
the experience of Eliphaz the friend of Job:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Now a word was secretly brought to me,</q></l>
<l>And mine ear received a whisper thereof.</l>
<l>In thoughts from the visions of the night,</l>
<l>When deep sleep falleth on men,</l>
<l>Fear came upon me, and trembling,</l>
<l>And all my bones were made to shake.</l>
<l>Then a spirit passed before my face,</l>
<l>That made the hair of my flesh to stand up.</l>
<l>It stood still, but I could not discern the appearance thereof;</l>
<l>A form was before mine eyes;</l>
<l><q rend='post'>I heard a still voice.</q><note place='foot'>Job IV, 12-16.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In such manner men of former ages received a religious revelation,
a divine message.
</p>

<p>
6. The divine spirit always selects as its instruments individuals
with special endowments. Still, insight into history
shows that these men must needs have grown from the
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
very heart of their own people and their own age, in order
that they might hold a lofty position among them and command
attention for their message. However far the people
or the age may be from the man chosen by God, the multitude
must feel at least that the divine spirit speaks through
him, or works within him. Or, if not his own time, then a
later generation must respond to his message, lest it be lost
entirely to the world.
</p>

<p>
The rabbis, who knew nothing of laws of development
for the human mind, assumed that the first man, made by
God Himself, must have known every branch of knowledge
and skill, that the spirit of God must have been most vigorous
in him.<note place='foot'>Gen. R. XXIV, 7; comp. Jubilees
III, 12.</note> They therefore believed in a primeval revelation,
coeval with the first man. Our age, with its tremendous
emphasis on the historical view, sees the divine spirit manifested
most clearly in the very development and growth of all
life, social, intellectual, moral and spiritual, proceeding
steadily toward the highest of all goals. With this emphasis,
however, on process, we must lay stress equally on the
origin, on the divine impulse or initiative in this historical
development, the spirit which gives direction and value to
the whole.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_XXXVII'/>
<head>Chapter XXXVII. Free Will and Moral Responsibility</head>

<p>
1. Judaism has ever emphasized the freedom of the will
as one of its chief doctrines. The dignity and greatness of
man depends largely upon his freedom, his power of self-determination.
He differs from the lower animals in his independence
of instinct as the dictator of his actions. He
acts from free choice and conscious design, and is able to change
his mind at any moment, at any new evidence or even through
whim. He is therefore responsible for his every act or omission,
even for his every intention. This alone renders him a
moral being, a child of God; thus the moral sense rests upon
freedom of the will.<note place='foot'>See Dillmann, l. c.,
301 f., 375; J. E., art. Freedom of Will.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. The idea of moral freedom is expressed as early as the
first pages of the Bible, in the words which God spoke to Cain
while he was planning the murder of his brother Abel:
<q>Whether or not, thou offerest an acceptable gift,</q> (New
Bible translation: <q>If thou doest well, shall it not be lifted
up? and if thou doest not well,</q>) <q>sin coucheth at the door;
and unto thee is its desire, but thou mayest rule over
it.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. IV, 7.</note>
Here, without any reference to the sin of Adam in the first
generation, the man of the second generation is told that
he is free to choose between good and evil, that he alone
is responsible before God for what he does or omits to do.
This certainly indicates that the moral freedom of man is
not impaired by hereditary sin, or by any evil power outside
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
of man himself. This principle is established in the words of
Moses spoken in the name of God: <q>I have set before thee
life and death, the blessing and the curse; therefore choose
life, that thou mayest live, thou and thy
seed.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XXX, 15-19.</note> In like
manner Jeremiah proclaims in God's name: <q>Behold I set
before you the way of life and the way of death.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. XXI, 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. From these passages and many similar ones the sages
derived their oft-repeated idea that man stands ever at the
parting of the ways, to choose either the good or the evil
path.<note place='foot'>See Sifre Deut. 53-54; J. E.,
art. Didache.</note> Thus the words spoken by God to the angels when
Adam and Eve were to be expelled from Paradise: <q>Behold,
the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil,</q> are
interpreted by R. Akiba: <q>He was given the choice to go
the way of life or the way of death, but he chose the way of
death by eating of the forbidden fruit.</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
III, 22; Mek. Beshallah 6; Gen. R. XXI. 5; Mid. Teh. Ps. XXXVI,
3; LVIII, 2.</note> R. Akiba emphasizes
the principle of the freedom of the will again in the terse
saying: <q>All things are foreseen (by God), but free will is
granted (to man).</q><note place='foot'>Aboth III, 15,
but see Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>, 285, note 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. At the first encounter of Judaism with those philosophical
schools of Hellas which denied the freedom of the human
will, the Jewish teachers insisted strongly on this principle.
The first reference is found in Ben Sira, who refutes the arguments
of the Determinists that God could make man sin,
and then goes on: <q>God created man at the beginning, endowing
him with the power of self-determination, saying to
him: If thou but willest, thou canst observe My commandments;
to practice faithfulness is a matter of free will....
As when fire and water are put before thee, so that thou mayest
reach forth thy hand to that which thou desirest, so are
life and death placed before man, and whatever he chooses of
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
his own desire will be given to him.</q><note place='foot'>Ben
Sira XV, 11-20.</note> The Book of Enoch
voices this truth also in the forceful sentences: <q>Sin has not
been sent upon the earth (from above), but men have produced
it out of themselves; therefore they who commit sin
are condemned.</q><note place='foot'>Enoch
XCVIII, 4.</note> We read similar sentiments in the Psalms
of Solomon, a Pharisean work of the first pre-Christian
century:<note place='foot'>IX, 7.</note>
<q>Our actions are the outcome of the free choice and
power of our own soul; to practice justice or injustice lies in
the work of our own hands.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Apocalypse of Ezra is especially instructive in the
great stress which it lays on freedom, in connection with its
chief theme, the sinfulness of the children of Adam. <q>This
is the condition of the contest which man who is born on earth
must wage, that, if he be conquered by the evil inclination,
he must suffer that of which thou hast spoken (the tortures
of hell), but if he be victorious, he shall receive (the reward)
which I (the angel) have mentioned. For this is the way
whereof Moses spoke when he lived, saying unto the people,
<q>Choose life, that thou mayest live!</q>... For all who knew
Me not in life when they received My benefits, who despised
My law when they yet had freedom, and did not heed the door
of repentance while it was still open before them, but disregarded
it, after death they shall come to know it!</q><note place='foot'>IV
Ezra VII, 127-129; IX, 10-11.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. Hellenistic Judaism also, particularly Philo,<note place='foot'>Quod deus
immutabilis, 10, I, 279; Di confusione linguarum, 35, I, 432;
Quod deterius potiori insid.</note> considered
the truly divine in man to be his free will, which distinguishes
him from the beast. Yet Hellenistic naturalism could not
grasp the fact that man's power to do evil in opposition to God,
the Source of the good, is the greatest reminder of his moral
responsibility. Josephus likewise mentions frequently as a
characteristic teaching of the Pharisees that man's free will
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
determines his acts without any compulsion of
destiny.<note place='foot'>Josephus, J. W., II, 8, 14; Ant. XVIII, I, 3.</note>
Only we must not accept too easily the words of this Jewish
historian, who wrote for his Roman masters and, therefore,
represented the Jewish parties as so many philosophical schools
after the Greek pattern. The Pharisean doctrine is presented
most tersely in the Talmudic maxim: <q>Everything is in the
hands of God except the fear of God.</q><note place='foot'>Ber.
33 b.</note> Like the quotation
from R. Akiba above, this contains the great truth that man's
destiny is determined by Providence, but his character depends
upon his own free decision. This idea recurs frequently
in such Talmudic sayings as these: <q>The wicked are in the
power of their desires; the righteous have their desires in
their own power;</q><note place='foot'>Gen. R.
LXVII, 7. Comp. P. R. El. XV.</note> <q>The eye, the ear, and the nostrils are
not in man's power, but the mouth, the hand, and the feet
are.</q><note place='foot'>Tanh. Toledoth, ed. Buber,
21.</note> That is, the impressions we receive from the world
without us come involuntarily, but our acts, our steps, and
our words arise from our own volition.
</p>

<p>
6. A deeper insight into the problem of free will is offered
in two other Talmudic sayings; the one is: <q>Whosoever
desires to pollute himself with sin will find all the gates open
before him, and whosoever desires to attain the highest purity
will find all the forces of goodness ready to help
him.</q><note place='foot'>Shab. 104 a; Yoma 38 b-39 a; Yer. Kid. I, 67 d.</note> The
other reads: <q>It can be proved by the Torah, the Prophets,
and the other sacred writings that man is led along the road
which he wishes to follow.</q><note place='foot'>Mak.
10 b; ref. to Ex. XXI, 12; Num. XXII, 12; Isa. XLVIII, 17;
Prov. III, 34.</note>
</p>

<p>
As a matter of fact, no person is absolutely free, for innumerable
influences affect his decisions, consciously and
unconsciously. For this reason many thinkers, both ancient
and modern, consider freedom a delusion and hold to determinism,
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
the doctrine that man acts always under the compulsion
of external and internal forces. In opposition to this
theory is one incontestable fact, our own inner sense of freedom
which tells us at every step that <emph>we</emph> have acted, and at
every decision that we have decided. Man can maintain his
own power of self-determination against all influences from
without and within; his will is the final arbiter over every
impulse and every pressure. Moreover, as we penetrate more
deeply into the working of the mind, we see that a long series
of our own voluntary acts has occasioned much that we consider
external, that the very pressure of the past on our
thoughts, feelings and habits, which leaves so little weight for
the decision of the moment, is really only our past will influencing
our present will. That is, the will may determine
itself, but it does not do so arbitrarily; its action is along the
lines of its own character. We have the power to receive the
influence of either the noble or the ignoble series of impressions,
and thus to yield either to the lofty or the low impulses
of the soul.
</p>

<p>
In this way the rabbis interpret various expressions of Scripture
which would seem to limit man's freedom, as where God
induces man to good or evil acts, or hardens the heart of
Pharaoh so that he will not let the Israelites go, until the
plagues had been fulfilled upon him and his people.<note place='foot'>Ex.
IV, 21; VII, 3, and elsewhere; see the Jewish commentaries to these
passages. Comp. Pes. 165 a; Num. R. XV, 16. See Schechter, <hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>,
289-292.</note> They
understand in such an instance that a man's heart has a prevailing
inclination toward right or wrong, the expression of
his character, and that God encouraged this inclination along
the evil course; thus the freedom of the human will was kept
intact.
</p>

<p>
7. The doctrine of man's free will presents another difficulty
from the side of divine omniscience. For if God knows in
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
advance what is to happen, then man's acts are determined
by this very foreknowledge; he is no longer free, and his moral
responsibility becomes an idle dream. In order to escape
this dilemma, the Mohammedan theologians were compelled
to limit either the divine omniscience or human freedom, and
most of them resorted to the latter method. It is characteristic
of Judaism that its great thinkers, from Saadia to Maimonides
and Gersonides,<note place='foot'>Saadia: <hi rend='italic'>Emunoth</hi>,
III, 154; IV, 7 f.; Bahya: <hi rend='italic'>Hoboth haleboboth</hi>, III, 8;
<hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>, V, 20; <hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>
I, 23; III, 16; <hi rend='italic'>H. Teshuba</hi>, V; Gersonides:
<hi rend='italic'>Milhamoth</hi>, III, 106; Albo: <hi rend='italic'>Ikkarim</hi>,
IV, 5-10; see Cassel notes, <hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>, p.
414.</note> dared not alter the doctrine of man's
free will and moral responsibility, but even preferred to limit
the divine omniscience. Hisdai Crescas is the only one to restrict
human freedom in favor of the foreknowledge of
God.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Or Adonai</hi> II, 4; comp. Bloch:
<hi rend='italic'>Willensfreiheit des Hisdai Crescas</hi>;
Neumark: <hi rend='italic'>Crescas and Spinoza</hi>, Y. B. C. C. A. R. 1908.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. The insistence of Judaism on unrestricted freedom of
will for each individual entirely excludes hereditary sin. This
is shown in the traditional explanation of the verse of the
Decalogue: <q>Visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate Me.</q><note place='foot'>Ex. XX, 5.</note>
According to the rabbis the words <q>of them that
hate Me</q> do not refer to the fathers, according to the plain
meaning of the passage, but to the children and children's
children. These are to be punished only when they hate God
and follow the evil example of their fathers.<note place='foot'>Sanh. 27 b.</note>
Despite example and hereditary disposition, the descendants of evildoers
can lead a virtuous life, and their punishment comes
only when they fail to resist the evil influences of their parental
household. To illustrate the Biblical words, <q>Who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean?</q><note place='foot'>Job XIV, 4.</note> the
rabbis single out Abraham, the son of Terah, Hezekiah, the son of Ahaz,
and Josiah, the son of Manasseh.<note place='foot'>Pesik. 29 b.</note> Man, being made in
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
God's image, determines his own character by his own free
choice; by his will he can raise or lower himself in the scale
of being.
</p>

<p>
9. The fundamental character of the doctrine of free will
for Judaism is shown by Maimonides, who devotes a special
chapter of his Code to it,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>H.
Teshubah</hi>, V.</note> and calls it the pillar of Israel's
faith and morality, since through it alone man manifests his
god-like sovereignty. For should his freedom be limited by
any kind of predestination, he would be deprived of his moral
responsibility, which constitutes his real greatness. In endeavoring
to reconcile God's omnipotence and omniscience
with man's freedom, Maimonides says that God wants man to
erect a kingdom of morality without interference from above;
moreover, God's knowledge is different in kind from that
of man, and thus is not an infringement upon man's freedom,
as the human type of knowledge would be. However,
Abraham ben David of Posquieres blames Maimonides for
proposing questions which he could not answer satisfactorily
in the Code, which is intended for non-philosophical readers.
The fact is that this is only another of the problems insoluble
to human reasoning; the freedom of the will must remain
for all time a postulate of moral responsibility, and therefore
of religion.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXXVIII. The Meaning of Sin</head>

<p>
1. Sin is a religious conception. It does not signify a
breach of law or morality, or of popular custom and sacred
usage, but an offense against God, provoking His punishment.
As long as the deity is merely dreaded as an external power,
not adored as a moral power ruling life from within for a
holy purpose, sin, too, is considered a purely formal offense.
The deity demands to be worshiped by certain rites and may
be propitiated by other formal acts.<note place='foot'>See
Morgenstern, <q><hi rend='italic'>The Doctrine of Sin in
the Babylonian Religion</hi>,</q> in
Mitth. Vorderas. Gesellsch. 1905.</note> For Judaism, however,
sin is a straying from the path of God, an offense against the
divine order of holiness. Thus it signifies an abuse of the
freedom granted man as his most precious boon. Therefore
sin has a twofold character; formally it is an offense against
the majesty of God, whose laws are broken; essentially it is
a severance of the soul's inner relations to God, an estrangement
from Him.
</p>

<p>
2. Scripture has three different terms for sin, which do not
differ greatly in point of language, but indicate three stages
of thought. First is <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>het</foreign> or
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hataah</foreign>, which connotes any
straying from the right path, whether caused by levity, carelessness,
or design, and may even include wrongs committed
unwittingly, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>shegagah</foreign>.
Second is <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>avon</foreign>, a crookedness or
perversion of the straight order of the law. Third is
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>pesha</foreign>,
a wicked act committed presumptuously in defiance of God
and His law. As a matter of course, the conception of
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
sin was deepened by degrees, as the prophets, psalmists and
moralists grew to think of God as the pattern of the highest
moral perfection, as the Holy One before whom an evil act or
thought cannot abide.
</p>

<p>
The rabbis usually employed the term
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>aberah</foreign>, that is, a
transgression of a divine commandment. In contrast to
this they used <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>mitzwah</foreign>,
a divine command, which denotes
also the whole range of duty, including the desire and intention
of the human soul. From this point of view every evil design
or impulse, every thought and act contrary to God's
law, becomes a sin.
</p>

<p>
3. Sin arises from the weakness of the flesh, the desire of
the heart, and accordingly in the first instance from an error
of judgment. The Bible frequently speaks of sin as
<q>folly.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. VI, 3; Ps. LXXVIII, 39.</note>
A rabbinical saying brings out this same idea: <q>No one sins
unless the spirit of folly has entered into him to deceive
him.</q><note place='foot'>Sota 3 a.</note>
A sinful imagination lures one to sin; the repetition of the
forbidden act lowers the barrier of the commandment, until
the trespass is hardened into <q>callous</q> and <q>stubborn</q> disregard,
and finally into <q>reckless defiance</q> and <q>insolent
godlessness.</q> Such a process is graphically expressed by the
various terms used in the Bible. According to the rabbinical
figure, <q>sin appears at first as thin as a spider's web, but grows
stronger and stronger, until it becomes like a wagon-rope to
bind a man.</q> Or, <q>sin comes at first as a passer-by to tarry
for a moment, then as a visitor to stay, finally as the master
of the house to claim possession.</q> Therefore it is incumbent
upon us to <q>guard</q> the heart, and not <q>to go astray following
after our eyes and our heart.</q><note place='foot'>Suk. 52 a,
b. Comp. Schechter, <q>The Evil Yezer, Source of Rebellion and
Victory over the Evil Yezer,</q> l. c., 242-292.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. According to the doctrine of Judaism no one is sinful
by nature. No person sins by an inner compulsion. But
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
as man has a nature of flesh, which is sensuous and selfish,
each person is inclined to sin and none is perfectly free from
it. <q>Who can say: I have made my heart clean, I am pure
from any sin?</q><note place='foot'>Prov. XX,
9.</note> This is the voice of the Bible and of all
human experience; <q>For there is not a righteous man upon
earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not.</q><note place='foot'>Eccl.
VII, 20.</note> The expression
occurs repeatedly in Job: <q>Shall mortal man be just before
God? Shall a man be pure before his Maker?</q><note place='foot'>Job
IV, 17; XV, 14 f; XXV, 5.</note> Even
Moses is represented in numerous passages as showing human
foibles and failings.<note place='foot'>Num. XX, 12;
XXVII, 14.</note> In fact, <q>the greater the personality,
the more severely will God call him to account for the smallest
trespass, for God desires to be <q>sanctified</q> by His righteous
ones.</q><note place='foot'>Yeb. 121 b.</note>
The Midrash tells us that no one is to be called
holy, until death has put an end to his struggle with the ever-lurking
tempter within, and he lies in the earth with the
victor's crown of peace upon his brow.<note place='foot'>Mid.
Teh. Ps. XVI, 2.</note> When we read the
stern sentence: <q>Behold, He putteth no trust in His holy
ones,</q><note place='foot'>Job XV, 15.</note>
the rabbis refer us to the patriarchs, each of whom
had his faults.<note place='foot'>Midr. Teh. eodem.</note>
Measured by the Pattern of all holiness, no
human being is free from blemish.
</p>

<p>
5. In connection with the God-idea, the conception of
sin grew from crude beginnings to the higher meaning given
it by Judaism. The ancient Babylonians used the same
terminology as the Bible for sin and sin-offering, but their
view, like that of other Semites, was far more
external.<note place='foot'>Morgenstern, l. c.</note> If
one was afflicted with disease or misfortune, the inference
was that he had neglected the ritual of some deity and must
appease the angered one with a sacrificial offering. Any irregularity
in the cult was an offense against the deity. This
became more moralized with the higher God-idea; the god
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
became the guardian of moral principles; and the calamities,
even of the nation, were then ascribed to the divine wrath on
account of moral lapses. The same process may be observed
in the views of ancient Israel. Here, too, during the dominance
of the priestly view the gravest possible offense was
one against the cult, a culpable act entailing the death
penalty&mdash;<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>asham</foreign>,
or <q>doom</q> of the offender. We shudder at
the thought that the least violation of the hierarchical rules
for the sanctuary or even for the burning of incense should
meet the penalty of death. Yet such is the plain statement of
the Mosaic law and such was the actual practice of the
people.<note place='foot'>Ex. XXX, 33, 38; Lev. X, 2; XVI,
1-2; Num. XVII, 28; XVIII, 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
The more the prophetic conception of the moral nature of
the Deity permeated the Jewish religion, the more the term
sin came to mean an offense against the holiness of God, the
Guardian of morality. Hence the great prophets upbraided
the people for their moral, not their ceremonial failings. They
attacked scathingly transgressions of the laws of righteousness
and purity, the true sins against God, because these originate
in dullness of heart, unbridled passion, and overbearing
pride, all so hateful to Him. The only ritual offenses emphasized
as sins against God are idolatry, violation of the name
of God and of the Sabbath, for these express the sanctity of
life.<note place='foot'>Ezek. XVIII, 6 f.; XX, 13 f.;
Isa. LVI, 2 f.</note> Except for these points, the prophets and psalmists
insisted only on righteous conduct and integrity of soul, and
repudiated entirely the ritualism of the priesthood and the
formalism of the cult.<note place='foot'>Hos. VI, 6; Mic.
VI, 8; Isa. I, 11 f.</note> This view is anticipated by Samuel,
the master of the prophetic schools, when he says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice,</q></l>
<l>And to hearken than the fat of rams.</l>
<l>For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And stubbornness is as idolatry and
teraphim.</q><note place='foot'>I Sam. XV, 22-23.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>

<p>
As soon as we realize that obedience to God's will means
right conduct and purity of soul, we see in sin the desecration
of the divine image in man, the violation of his heavenly
patent of nobility.
</p>

<p>
6. Sin, then, is in its essence unfaithfulness to God and to
our own god-like nature. We see this thought expressed in
Job:<note place='foot'>Job XXXV, 6-8.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>If thou hast sinned, what doest thou against Him?</q></l>
<l>And if thy transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto Him?</l>
<l>If thou be righteous, what givest thou unto Him?</l>
<l>Or what receiveth He of thy hand?</l>
<l>Thy wickedness concerneth a man as thou art;</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And thy righteousness a son of man.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Thus the source of sin is the human heart, the origin of all
our thinking and planning. We know sin chiefly as consciousness
of guilt. Man's conscience accuses him and compels
him to confess, <q>Against Thee, Thee only, have I
sinned.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. LI, 6.</note>
Not only the deed itself, but even more the will which caused
it, is condemned by conscience. Such self-accusation constantly
proves anew that there is no place for original sin
through the fall of Adam. <q>I could have controlled my evil
desire, if I had but earnestly willed it,</q> said King David, according
to the Talmud.<note place='foot'>Sanh. 107 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. Sin engenders a feeling of disunion with God through
the consciousness of guilt which accompanies it. It erects
a <q>wall of separation</q> between man and his Maker, depriving
him of peace and security.<note place='foot'>Isa. LIX, 2.</note> Guilt causes pain, which
overwhelms him, until he has made atonement and obtained
pardon before God. This is no imaginary feeling, easily overcome
and capable of being suppressed by the sinner with impunity.
Instead, he must pay the full penalty for his sin,
lest it lead him to the very abyss of evil, to physical and moral
death. Sin in the individual becomes a sense of self-condemnation,
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
the consciousness of the divine anger. Hence the
Hebrew term <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>avon</foreign>, sin, is
often synonymous with punishment,<note place='foot'>Gen. IV,
13; XV, 16; XIX, 15; Ps. XL, 13.</note>
and <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>asham</foreign>,
guilt, often signifies the atonement for the guilt,
and sometimes doom and perdition as a consequence of
guilt.<note place='foot'>Gen. XXVI, 10;
XLII, 21; Ps. XXXIV, 22.</note> Undoubtedly this still contains a remnant of the old
Semitic idea that an awful divine visitation may come upon
an entire household or community because of a criminal or
sacrilegious act committed, consciously or unconsciously, by
one of its members. Such a fate can be averted only by an
atoning sacrifice. This accords with the rather strange fact
that the Priestly Code prescribes certain guilt offerings for
sins committed unwittingly, which are called
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>asham</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Lev.
IV, 13 f.; Num. V, 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. But even these unintentional sins can be avoided by
the constant exercise of caution, so that their commission
implies a certain degree of guilt, which demands a measure of
repentance. Thus the Psalmist says: <q>Who can discern
errors? Clear Thou me from hidden faults.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XIX, 13.</note> He
thus implies that we feel responsible in a certain sense for all our
sins, including those which we commit unknowingly. The
rabbis dwell especially on the idea that we are never altogether
free from sinful thoughts. For this reason, they tell us, the
two burnt offerings were brought to the altar each morning
and evening, to atone for the sinful thoughts of the people
during the preceding day or night.<note place='foot'>Num. R. XXI, 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. At any rate, Judaism recognizes no sin which does not
arise from the individual conscience or moral personality.
The condemnation of a whole generation or race in consequence
of the sin of a single individual is an essentially heathen
idea, which was overcome by Judaism in the course of time
through the prophetic teaching of the divine justice and man's
moral responsibility. This sentiment was voiced by Moses
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
and Aaron after the rebellion of Korah in the words: <q>O
God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin,
and wilt Thou be wroth with all the congregation?</q><note place='foot'>Num.
XVI, 22.</note> In commenting upon this, the Midrash says: <q>A human king
may make war upon a whole province, because it contains
rebels who have caused sedition, and so the innocent must
suffer together with the guilty; but it does not behoove God,
the Ruler of the spirits, who looks into the hearts of men, to
punish the guiltless together with the guilty.</q><note place='foot'>Tanh.
Korah, ed. Buber, 19.</note> The Christian
view of universal guilt as a consequence of Adam's sin,
the dogma of original sin, is actually a relapse from the
Jewish stage to the heathen doctrine from which the Jewish
religion freed itself.
</p>

<p>
10. According to the Biblical view sin contaminates man,
so that he cannot stand in the presence of God. The holiness
of Him who is <q>of eyes too pure to behold evil</q><note place='foot'>Habak.
I, 13.</note> becomes to the sinner <q>a devouring
fire.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XXXIII, 14.</note> Even the lofty prophet Isaiah
realizes his own human limitations at the sublime vision of
the God of holiness enthroned on high, while the angelic
choruses chant their thrice holy. In humility and contrition
he cries out: <q>Woe is me, for I am undone! Because I am
a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of
unclean lips; For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of
hosts.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. VI,
5-7.</note> The prophet must undergo atonement in order to
be prepared for his high prophetic task. One of the Seraphs
purges him of his sins by touching his lips with a live coal
taken from the altar of God.
</p>

<p>
Under the influence of Persian dualism, rabbinical Judaism
considers sin a pollution which puts man under the power of
unclean spirits.<note place='foot'>Pes. 45 b;
Gen. R. XXIII, 9.</note> In the later Cabbalah this idea is elaborated
until the world of sin is considered a cosmic power of
impurity, opposed to the realm of right, working evil ever
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
since the fall of Adam.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Cabala;
Abelson, <hi rend='italic'>Jewish Mysticism</hi>, p. 127 f.,
171 f.</note> Still, however close this may come
to the Christian dogma, it never becomes identical with it;
the recognition is always preserved of man's power to extricate
himself from the realm of impurity and to elevate himself
into the realm of purity by his own repentance. Sin never
becomes a demoniacal power depriving man of his divine
dignity of self-determination and condemning him to eternal
damnation. It ever remains merely a going astray from the
right path, a stumbling from which man may rise again to
his heavenly height, exerting his own powers as the son of
God.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_XXXIX'/>
<head>Chapter XXXIX. Repentance Or the Return To God</head>

<p>
1. The brightest gem among the teachings of Judaism is
its doctrine of repentance or, in its own characteristic term,
the return of the wayward sinner to God.<note place='foot'>See
J. E., art. Repentance; Claude Montefiore: <q>Rabbinical Conceptions
of Repentance,</q> in J. Q. R., Jan. 1904; Schechter, <hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>,
313-343. The works of Weber (p. 261 f.), Bousset (p. 446 f.), and Davidson (l. c.,
327-338) do not do justice to the Jewish teachings.</note> Man, full of remorse
at having fallen away from the divine Fountainhead
of purity, conscious of deserving a sentence of condemnation
from the eternal Judge, would be less happy than the unreasoning
brute which cannot sin at all. Religion restores him
by the power to rise from his shame and guilt, to return to
God in repentance, as the penitent son returns to his father.
Whether we regard sin as estrangement from God or as a
disturbance of the divine order, it has a detrimental effect
on both body and soul, and leads inevitably to death. On
this point the Bible affords many historical illustrations and
doctrinal teachings.<note place='foot'>Ezek. XVIII, 4;
Ps. XXXIV, 21; Prov. XIV, 12.</note> If man had no way to escape from sin,
then he would be the most unfortunate of creatures, in spite
of his god-like nature. Therefore the merciful God opens the
gate of repentance for the sinner, saying as through His prophets
of old: <q>I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked,
but that the wicked turn from his way and live.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek.
XVIII, 32; XXXIII, 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. The great value of the gift of divine grace, by which
the sinner may repent and return to God with a new spirit, appears
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
in the following rabbinical saying: <q>Wisdom was asked,
<q>What shall be the sinner's punishment?</q> and answered, <q>Evil
pursues sinners</q>;<note place='foot'>Prov. XIII, 21.</note> then Prophecy was asked, and
answered, <q>The soul that sinneth, it shall die</q>;<note place='foot'>Ezek. XVIII,
4.</note> the Torah, or legal code,
was consulted, and its answer was: <q>He shall bring a sin-offering,
and the priest shall make atonement for him, and he shall be
forgiven.</q><note place='foot'>Lev. I, 4; IV, 26-31.</note> Finally God Himself was
asked, and He answered:<note place='foot'>Ps. XXV, 8.</note> <q>Good and upright is
the Lord; therefore doth He instruct sinners in the
way.</q></q><note place='foot'>Yer. Mak. II, 37 d; Pesik. 158
b. See Schechter, l. c., p. 294, note 1.</note> The Jewish idea of
atonement by the sinner's return to God excludes every kind
of mediatorship. Neither the priesthood nor sacrifice is
necessary to secure the divine grace; man need only find
the way to God by his own efforts. <q>Seek ye Me, and
live,</q><note place='foot'>Amos V, 4.</note>
says God to His erring children.
</p>

<p>
3. <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Teshubah</foreign>,
which means return, is an idea peculiar to
Judaism, created by the prophets of Israel, and arising directly
from the simple Jewish conception of sin. Since sin is
a deviation from the path of salvation, a <q>straying</q> into the
road of perdition and death, the erring can return with heart
and soul, end his ways, and thus change his entire being.
This is not properly expressed by the term repentance, which
denotes only regret for the wrong, but not the inner transformation.
Nor is <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Teshubah</foreign> to be rendered by either
penitence or penance. The former indicates a sort of bodily
self-castigation, the latter some other kind of penalty undergone
in order to expiate sin. Such external forms of asceticism
were prescribed and practiced by many tribes and some
of the historical religions. The Jewish prophets, however,
opposed them bitterly, demanding an inner change, a transformation
of soul, renewing both heart and spirit.
</p>

<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Let the wicked forsake his way,</q></l>
<l>And the man of iniquity his thoughts;</l>
<l>And let him return unto the Lord, and He will have compassion upon him,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And to our God, for He will abundantly
pardon.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. LV, 7.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Judaism considers sin merely moral aberration, not utter corruption,
and believes in the capability of the very worst of sinners
to improve his ways; therefore it waits ever for his regeneration.
This is truly a return to God, the restoration of the divine
image which has been disfigured and corrupted by sin.
</p>

<p>
4. The doctrine of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Teshubah</foreign>,
or the return of the sinner,
has a specially instructive history, as this most precious and
unique conception of Judaism is little understood or appreciated
by Christian theologians. Often without intentional
bias, these are so under the influence of the Paulinian dogma
that they see no redemption for man corrupted by sin, except
by his belief in a superhuman act of atonement. It is certainly
significant that the legal code, which is of priestly origin,
does not mention repentance or the sinner's return. It prescribes
various types of sin-offerings, speaks of reparation for
wrong inflicted, of penalties for crime, and of confession for
sins, but it does not state how the soul can be purged of sin,
so that man can regain his former state of purity. This great
gap is filled by the prophetic books and the Psalms. The
book of Deuteronomy alone, written under prophetic influence,
alludes to repentance, in connection with the time when
Israel would be taken captive from its land as punishment
for its violation of the law. There we read: <q>Thou shalt
return unto the Lord thy God, ... with all thy heart, and
all thy soul, then the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity,
and have compassion upon thee.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. IV, 30; XXX, 2-3.</note>
</p>

<p>
Amos, the prophet of stern justice, has not yet reached the idea of averting the
divine wrath by the return of the sinner.<note place='foot'>Amos IV, 6 f.</note>
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
Hosea, the prophet of divine mercy and loving-kindness, in
his deep compassion for the unfaithful and backsliding people,
became the preacher of repentance as the condition for attaining
the divine pardon.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Return, O Israel, unto the Lord thy God;</q></l>
<l>For thou hast stumbled in thine iniquity.</l>
<l>Take with you words (of repentance),</l>
<l>And return unto the Lord;</l>
<l>Say unto Him, <q rend='pre'>Forgive all iniquity,</q></l>
<l>And accept that which is good;</l>
<l><q rend='post'><q rend='post'>So will we render for bullocks the offering of our
lips.</q></q><note place='foot'>Hos. VI, 1; XIV, 2 f.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The appeal of Jeremiah is still more vigorous:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the Lord....</q></l>
<l>Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast transgressed against
the Lord thy God....</l>
<l>Break up for you a fallow ground, and sow not among thorns....</l>
<l>O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou mayest be saved;</l>
<l>How long shall thy baleful thoughts lodge within thee?...</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Return ye now every one from his evil way, and amend your ways
and your doings.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. III, 12-13; IV, 3; 14; XVIII, 11.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Ezekiel, while emphasizing the guilt of the individual,
preached repentance still more insistently. <q>Return ye, and
turn yourselves from all your transgressions; so shall they
not be a stumbling-block of iniquity to you. Cast away from
you all your transgressions, wherein ye have transgressed;
and make you a new heart and a new spirit; for why will
ye die, O house of Israel? For I have no pleasure in the death
of him that dieth, saith the Lord God; wherefore turn yourselves,
and live.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. XVIII, 1-32.</note>
The same appeal recurs after the exile
in the last prophets, Zechariah<note place='foot'>Zech. I, 3.</note>
and Malachi.<note place='foot'>Mal. III, 7.</note> The latter
says: <q>Return unto Me, and I shall return unto you.</q> Likewise
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
the penitential sermon written in a time of great distress,
which is ascribed to the prophet Joel, contains the appeal:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Turn ye unto Me with all your heart,</q></l>
<l>And with fasting, and with weeping, and with lamentation;</l>
<l>And rend your heart, and not your garments,</l>
<l>And turn unto the Lord your God;</l>
<l>For He is gracious and compassionate,</l>
<l>Long-suffering, and abundant in mercy,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And repenteth Him of the evil.</q><note place='foot'>Joel
II, 12-13.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
This prophetic view, which demands contrition and craving
for God instead of external modes of atonement, is expressed
in the penitential Psalms as well,<note place='foot'>See
Ps. XXXII, 1 f.</note> especially in Psalm
LI. The idea is expanded further in the parable of the
prophet Jonah, which conveys the lesson that even a heathen
nation like the people of Nineveh can avert the impending
judgment of God by true repentance.<note place='foot'>Jonah
III-IV.</note> From this point of
view the whole conception took on a larger aspect, and the
entire history of mankind was seen in a new light. The
Jewish sages realized that God punishes man only when the
expected change of mind and heart fails to come.<note place='foot'>The
Hebrew <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>teshubah</foreign>
is translated in Greek <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>metanoia</foreign>, meaning a change
of mind.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. The Jewish plan of divine salvation presents a striking
contrast to that of the Church, for it is built upon the presumption
that all sinners can find their way back to God and
godliness, if they but earnestly so desire. Even before God
created the world, He determined to offer man the possibility
of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Teshubah</foreign>,
so that, in the midst of the continual struggle
with the allurements of the senses, the repentant sinner can
ever change heart and mind and return to God.<note place='foot'>Pes.
119 a; P. d. R. El. XLIII.</note> Without
such a possibility the world of man could not endure; thus,
because no man can stand before the divine tribunal of stern
justice, the paternal arm of a merciful God is extended to
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
receive the penitent. This sublime truth is constantly reiterated
in the Talmud and in the liturgy, especially of the
great Day of Atonement.<note place='foot'>Pes. 54 a; Gen, R. I, 5; P.
d. R. El. III; Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi> 267 f.</note> Not only does God's
long-suffering give the sinner time to repent; His paternal love urges
him to return. Thus the Haggadists purposely represent
almost all the sinners mentioned in the Bible as models of
sincere repentance. First of all comes King David, who is
considered such a pattern of repentance, as the author of the
fifty-first Psalm, that he would not have been allowed to sin
so grievously, if he had not been providentially appointed as
the shining example of the penitent's return to
God.<note place='foot'>Shab. 56 a; Ab. Z. 4 b-5 a; Midr. Teh. Ps. XL, 3; LI, 13.</note> Then
there is King Manasseh, the most wicked among all the
kings of Judah and Israel, who had committed the most
abominable sins of idolatrous worship. Referring to the story
told of him in Chronicles, it is said that God responded to
his tearful prayers and incessant supplications by opening a
rift under His throne of mercy and receiving his petition for
pardon. Thus all mankind might see that none can be so
wicked that he will not find the door of repentance open, if he
but seek it sincerely and persistently.<note place='foot'>Ter.
Sanh. X, 78 c; Sanh. 103 a; Pes. 162; Prayer of Manasseh.</note> Likewise Adam and
Cain, Reuben and Judah, Korah, Jeroboam, Ahab, Josiah, and
Jechoniah are described in Talmud, Midrash, and the apocalyptic
literature as penitent sinners who obtained at last the
coveted pardon.<note place='foot'>Pesik. 160 a-162; Shab. 56 a,
b; Gen. R. XI, 6; XXII, 12-13; XXXVIII,
9; XLIX, 6; P. R. El. XX; XLIII; Num. R. XVIII, 6; Ab. d. R. N. I, 32;
Sanh. 102 b.</note> The optimistic spirit of Judaism cannot
tolerate the idea that mortal man is hopelessly lost under the
burden of his sins, or that he need ever lose faith in himself.
No one can sink so low that he cannot find his way back to
his heavenly Father by untiring self-discipline. As the
Talmud says, nothing can finally withstand the power of
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
sincere repentance: <q>It reaches up to the very seat of God;</q>
<q>upon it rests the welfare of the world.</q><note place='foot'>Yoma
86 a, b; Pes. R. XLIX.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. The rabbis follow up the idea first announced in the
book of Jonah, that the saving power of repentance applies
to the heathen world as well. Thus they show how God
constantly offered time and opportunity to the heathens for
repentance. For example, when the generation of the flood,
the builders of the Tower of Babel, and the people of Sodom
and Gomorrah were to be punished, God waited to give them
time for Repentance and improvement of their
ways.<note place='foot'>Mek. Shira 5; Gen. R. XXI, 6; XXX, 4; XXXII, 10; XXXVIII,
14; LXXXIV, 18; Ex. R. XII, 1; Num. R. XII, 13; B. Wisdom XI, 23;
XII, 10, 19.</note> Noah,
Enoch, and Abraham are represented as monitors of their
contemporaries, warning them, like the prophets, to repent
in time lest they meet their doom.<note place='foot'>Sanh.
108; Sibyllines, I, 125-198.</note> Thus the whole Hellenistic
literature of propaganda, especially the Sibylline books,
echoes the warning and the hope that the heathen should
repent of their grievous sins and return to God, whom they
had deserted in idolatry, so that they might escape the impending
doom of the last judgment day. According to one
Haggadist,<note place='foot'>Cant. R. VII, 5, ref.
to the name <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hadrach</foreign>,
Zech. IX, 1.</note> even the Messiah will appear first as a preacher
of repentance, admonishing the heathen nations to be converted
to the true God and repent before Him, lest they fall
into perdition. Indeed, it is said that even Pharaoh and
the Egyptians were warned and given time for repentance
before their fate overtook them.
</p>

<p>
7. Accordingly, the principle of repentance is a universal
human one, and by no means exclusively national, as the
Christian theologians represent it.<note place='foot'>Weber,
l. c., 261 f.; Bousset, l. c., 446 f.; comp. Perles:
<hi rend='italic'>Bousset.</hi></note> The sages thus describe
Adam as the type of the penitent sinner, who is granted pardon
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
by God. The <q>sign</q> of Cain also was to be a sign for
all sinners, assuring them they might all obtain forgiveness
and salvation, if they would but return to
God.<note place='foot'>Gen. R. XXII, 27; comp. Sanh 107 b.</note> In fact,
the prophetic appeal to Israel for repentance, vain at the
time, effected the regeneration of the people during the
Exile and gave rise to Judaism and its institutions. In the
same way, the appeal to the heathen world by the Hellenistic
propaganda and the Essene preachers of repentance did not
induce the nations at once to prepare for the coming of the
Messianic kingdom, but finally led to the rise of the Christian
religion, and, through certain intermediaries, of the
Mohammedan as well.
</p>

<p>
However, the long-cherished hope for a universal conversion
of the heathen world, voiced in the preachments and the
prayers of the <q>pious ones,</q> gave way to a reaction. The
rise of antinomian sects in Judaism occasioned the dropping
of this pious hope, and only certain individual conversions
were dwelt on as shining exceptions.<note place='foot'>Mek.
Yithro I.</note> The heathen world
in general was not regarded as disposed to repent, and so
its ultimate fate was the doom of Gehenna. Experience
seemed to confirm the stern view, which rabbinical interpretation
could find in Scripture also, that <q>Even at the very
gate of the nether world wicked men shall not
return.</q><note place='foot'>Erub. 19 a.</note>
The growing violence of the oppressors and the increasing
number of the maligners of Judaism darkened the hope for
a universal conversion of humanity to the pure faith of
Israel and its law of righteousness. On the contrary, a
certain satisfaction was felt by the Jew in the thought that
these enemies of Judaism should not be allowed to repent and
obtain salvation in the hereafter.<note place='foot'>Mid.
Teh. Ps. I, 21 f.; IX, 13, 15; XI, 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. The idea of repentance was applied all the more intensely
in Jewish life, and a still more prominent place was
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
accorded it in Jewish literature. The rabbis have numberless
sayings<note place='foot'>See Maimonides, Bahya, and others on
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Teshubah;</foreign> comp. J. E., art. Repentance;
Tobit XIII, 6; XIV, 6; Philo II, 435.</note> in the Talmud and also in the Haggadic and
ethical writings concerning the power and value of repentance.
In passages such as these we see how profoundly
Judaism dealt with the failings and shortcomings of man.
The term <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>asa teshubah</foreign>,
do repentance, implies no mere external
act of penitence, as Christian theologians often assert.
On the contrary, the chief stress is always laid on the feeling
of remorse and on the change of heart which contrition and
self-accusation bring. Yet even these would not be sufficient
to cast off the oppressive consciousness of guilt, unless the
contrite heart were reassured by God that He forgives the
penitent son of man with paternal grace and love. In other
words, religion demands a special means of atonement, that is,
<emph>at-one-ment</emph> with God, to restore the broken relation of man
to his Maker. The true spiritual power of Judaism appears
in this, that it gradually liberates the kernel of the atonement
idea from its priestly shell. The Jew realizes, as does the
adherent of no other religion, that even in sin he is a child
of God and certain of His paternal love. This is brought
home especially on the Day of Atonement, which will be
treated in a later chapter.
</p>

<p>
9. At all events, the blotting out of man's sins with their
punishment remains ever an act of grace by God.<note place='foot'>See
Schechter, l. c., 323 f.</note> In compassion
for man's frailty He has ordained repentance as
the means of salvation, and promised pardon to the penitent.
This truth is brought out in the liturgy for the Day of Atonement,
as well as in the Apocalyptic Prayer of Manasseh.
At the same time, Judaism awards the palm of victory to
him who has wrestled with sin and conquered it by his own
will. Thus the rabbis boldly assert: <q>Those who have
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
sinned and repented rank higher in the world to come than
the righteous who have never sinned,</q> which is paralleled
in the New Testament: <q>There is more joy in heaven over
one sinner who repenteth than over ninety and nine righteous
persons, who need no repentance.</q><note place='foot'>Sanh.
99 a, Luke XV, 7. The third Gospel more than the others
preserved the original Jewish doctrines of the Church.</note> No intermediary power
from without secures the divine grace and pardon for the
repentant sinner, but his own inner transformation alone.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XL. Man, the Child of God</head>

<p>
1. The belief that God hears our prayers and pardons our
sins rests upon the assumption of a mutual relation between
man and God. This belief is insusceptible of proof, but rests
entirely upon our religious feelings and is rooted purely in
our emotional life. We apply to the relation between man
and God the finest feelings known in human life, the devotion
and love of parents for their children and the affection
and trust the child entertains for its parents. Thus we are led
to the conviction that earth-born man has a Helper enthroned
in the heavens above, who hearkens when he implores Him
for aid. In his innermost heart man feels that he has a special
claim on the divine protection. In the words of
Job,<note place='foot'>Job XIX, 25. The Hebrew
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Goel</foreign> signifies kinsman as well as redeemer and
avenger, implying blood-relationship. In Job it means vindicator.</note> he knows
that his Redeemer liveth. He need not perish in misery.
Unlike the brute creation and the hosts of stars, which know
nothing of their Maker, man feels akin to the God who lives
within him; he is His image, His child. He cannot be deprived
of His paternal love and favor. This truly human
emotion is nowhere expressed so clearly as in Judaism. <q>Ye
are the children of the Lord your God.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XIV, 1.</note>
<q>Have we not all one Father? Hath not one God created
us?</q><note place='foot'>Mal. II, 10.</note> <q>Like as
a father hath compassion on his children, so hath the Lord
compassion upon them that fear Him.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. CIII, 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. Still, this simple idea of man's filial relation to God and
God's paternal love for man did not begin in its beautiful final
form. For a long time the Jew seems to have avoided the
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
term <q>Father</q> for God, because it was used by the heathen for
their deities as physical progenitors, and did not refer to the
moral relation between the Deity and mankind. Thus
worshipers of wooden idols would, according to Scripture,
<q>say to a stock, Thou art my father.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. II, 27.</note> Hosea was
the first to call the people of Israel <q>children of the living
God,</q><note place='foot'>Hosea II, 1.</note> if
they would but improve their ways and enter into right relations
with Him. Jeremiah also hopes for the time when
Israel would invoke the Lord, saying, <q>Thou art my Father,</q> and in return
God would prove a true father to him.<note place='foot'>See Jer. III, 4.</note> However,
Scripture calls God a Father only in referring to the
people as a whole.<note place='foot'>Jer. XXXI, 9; Deut.
XXXII, 7; Isa. LXIII, 16; LXIV, 7; Mal. I, 4;
I Chron. XXIX, 10.</note> The <q>pious ones</q> established a closer
relation between God and the individual by means of prayer,
so that through them the epithets, <q>Father,</q> <q>Our Father,</q>
and <q>Our Father in heaven</q> came into general use. Hence,
the liturgy frequently uses the invocation, <q>Our Father,
Our King!</q> We owe to Rabbi Akiba the significant saying,
in opposition to the Paulinian dogma, <q>Blessed are ye, O
Israelites! Before whom do you purify yourselves (from your
sins)? And who is it that purifies you? Your Father in
heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Yoma VIII, 9.</note> Previously Rabbi Eliezer ben Hyrcanos
dwelt on the moral degeneration of his age, which betokened the
end of time, and exclaimed: <q>In whom, then, shall we find
support? In our Father who is in heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Sota IX, 15.</note> The
appellative <q>Father in heaven</q> was the stereotyped term used
by the <q>pious ones</q> during the century preceding and the
one following the rise of Christianity, as a glance at the
literature of the period indicates.<note place='foot'>See
next paragraph, and the art. <hi rend='italic'>Abba</hi> in J. E.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. It is instructive to follow the history of this term. In
Scripture God is represented as speaking to David, <q>I will be
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
to him for a father, and he shall be to Me for a
son,</q><note place='foot'>II Sam. VII, 14.</note> or <q>He
shall call unto Me: Thou art my Father, ... I also will
appoint him first-born.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. LXXXIX,
27-28.</note> So in the apocryphal writings
God speaks both to Israel and to individual saints: <q>I shall
be to them a Father, and they shall be My children.</q><note place='foot'>Jubilees
I, 24.</note> Elsewhere
it is said of the righteous, <q>He calls God his Father,</q>
and <q>he shall be counted among the sons of
God.</q><note place='foot'>Wisdom II, 16; V, 5.</note> We
read concerning the Messiah: <q>When all wrongdoing will be
removed from the midst of the people, he shall know that
all are sons of God.</q><note place='foot'>Psalms of
Solomon XVII, 27.</note> Obviously only righteousness or personal
merit entitles a man to be called a son of God. In
fact, we are expressly told of Onias, the great Essene saint,
that his intimate relation with God emboldened him to converse
with the Master of the Universe as a son would speak
with his father.<note place='foot'>Taan. III, 8.</note>
According to the Mishnah the older generation
of <q>pious ones</q> used to spend <q>an hour in silent devotion
before offering their daily prayer, in order to concentrate
heart and soul upon their communion with their Father
in heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Ber. V, 1.</note>
Thus it is said of congregational prayer that
through it <q>Israel lifts his eyes to his Father in
heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Midr. Teh. Ps. CXXI, 1.</note>
In this way prayer took the place of the altar, of which R.
Johanan ben Zakkai said that it established peace between
Israel and his Father in heaven.<note place='foot'>Mek.
Yithro 11.</note> Afterwards the question
was discussed by Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Jehuda whether even
sin-laden Israel had a right to be called <q>children of God.</q>
Rabbi Meir pointed to Hosea as proof that the backsliders also
remain <q>children of the living God.</q><note place='foot'>Sifre
Deut. 96; Hosea I, 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. In the Hellenistic literature, with its dominating idea
of universal monotheism, God is frequently invoked or spoken
of as the Father of mankind. The implication is that each
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
person who invokes God as Father enters into filial relation
with Him. Thus what was first applied to Israel in particular
was now broadened to include mankind in general,
and consequently all men were considered <q>children of the
living God.</q> The words of God to Pharaoh, speaking of
Israel as His <q>first-born son,</q><note place='foot'>Ex.
IV, 22.</note> were taken as proof that all
the nations of the earth are sons of God and He the universal
Father. Israel is the first-born among the sons of God, because
his patriarchs, prophets, and psalmists first recognized
Him as the universal Father and Ruler. From this point of
view Judaism declared love for fellow-men and regard for the
dignity of humanity to be fundamental principles of ethics.
<q>As God is kind and merciful toward His creation, be thou
also kind and merciful toward all fellow-creatures,</q> is the oft-repeated
teaching of the rabbis.<note place='foot'>Sifre Deut. 49.</note> Likewise, <q>Whoever takes
pity on his fellow-beings, on him God in heaven will also take
pity.</q><note place='foot'>Sifre Deut. 96.</note> Love of humanity has so permeated the
nature of the Jew that the rabbis assert: <q>He who has pity on his fellow-men
has the blood of Abraham in his veins.</q><note place='foot'>Beza 32 b.</note> This
bold remark casts light upon the strange dictum: <q>Ye
Israelites are called by the name of man, but the heathen are
not.</q><note place='foot'>Yeb. 61 a.</note> The Jewish teachers were so deeply impressed
with man's inhumanity to man, so common among the heathen
nations, and the immorality of the lives by which these desecrated
God's image, that they insisted that the laws of humanity
alone make for divine dignity in man.
</p>

<p>
5. Rabbi Akiba probably referred to the Paulinian dogma
that Jesus, the crucified Messiah, is the only son of God, in
his well-known saying: <q>Beloved is man, for he is created
in God's image, and it was a special token of love that he became
conscious of it. Beloved is Israel, for they are called
the children of God, and it was a special token of love that they
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
became conscious of it.</q><note place='foot'>Aboth III, 13,
quoted above, Chap. <ref target='Chapter_XXXIV_Section_6'>XXXIV, par. 6</ref>.</note>
Here he claims the glory of being
a son of God for Israel, but not for all men. Still, as soon as
the likeness of man to God is taken in a spiritual sense, then
it is implied that all men have the same capacity for being a
son of God which is claimed for Israel. This is unquestionably
the view of Judaism when it considers the Torah as entrusted
to Israel to bring light and blessing to all the families
of men. Rabbi Meir, the disciple of Rabbi Akiba, said:
<q>The Scriptural words, <q>The statutes and ordinances which
<emph>man</emph> shall do and live thereby,</q> and similar expressions indicate
that the final aim of Judaism is not attained by the
Aaronide, nor the Levite, nor even the Israelite, but by
mankind.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sifra Ahare</hi> 13, p. 86.</note>
Such a saying expresses clearly and emphatically
that God's fatherly love extends to all men as His children.
</p>

<p>
6. According to the religious consciousness of modern Israel
man is made in God's image, and is thus a child of God. Consequently
Jew and non-Jew, saint and sinner have the same
claim upon God's paternal love and mercy. There is no
distinction in favor of Israel except as he lives a higher and
more god-like life. Even those who have fallen away from
God and have committed crime and sin remain God's children.
If they send up their penitent cry to the throne of God,
<q>Pardon us, O Father, for we have sinned! Forgive us, O
King, for we have done evil!</q>; their prayer is heard by the
heavenly Father exactly like that of the pious son of Israel.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLI. Prayer and Sacrifice</head>

<p>
1. The gap between man and the sublime Master of the
universe is vast, but not absolute. The thoughts of God are
high above our thoughts, and the ways of God above our
ways, baffling our reason when we endeavor to solve the
vexatious problems of destiny, of merit and demerit, of retribution
and atonement. Yet religion offers a wondrous
medium to bring the heart of man into close communion with
Him who is enthroned above the heavens, one that overleaps
all distances, removes all barriers, and blends all dissonances
into one great harmony, and that is&mdash;Prayer. As the child
must relieve itself of its troubles and sorrows upon the bosom
of its mother or father in order to turn its pain into gladness,
so men at all times seek to approach the Deity, confiding to
Him all their fears and longings in order to obtain peace of
heart. Prayer, communion between the human soul and
the Creator, is the glorious privilege enjoyed by man alone
among all creatures, as he alone is the child of God. It
voices the longing of the human heart for its Father in heaven.
As the Psalmist has it, <q>My soul thirsteth for God, for the
living God.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XLII, 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. However, both language, the means of intercourse between
man and man, and prayer, the means of intercourse
between man and God, show traces of a slow development
lasting for thousands of years, until the loftiest thoughts and
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
sublimest emotions could be expressed. The real efficacy of
prayer could not be truly appreciated, until the prophetic
spirit triumphed over the priestly element in Judaism. In
the history of speech the language of signs preceded that of
sounds, and images gradually ripened into abstract thoughts.
Similarly, primitive man approaches his God with many kinds
of gifts and sacrificial rites to express his sentiments. He acts
out or depicts what he expects from the Deity, whether rain,
fertility of the soil, or the extermination of his foes. He
shares with his God his food and drink, to obtain His friendship
and protection in time of trouble, and sacrifices the dearest
of his possessions to assuage His wrath or obtain His favor.
</p>

<p>
3. In the lowest stage of culture man needed no mediator
in his intercourse with the Deity, who appeared to him in the
phenomena of nature as well as in the fetish, totem, and the
like. But soon he rose to a higher stage of thought, and the
Deity withdrew before him to the celestial heights, filling him
with awe and fear; then rose a class of men who claimed the
privilege to approach the Deity and influence Him by certain
secret practices. Henceforth these acted as mediators between
the mass of the people and the Deity. In the first
place, these were the magicians, medicine-men, and similar
persons, who were credited with the power to conjure up the
hidden forces of nature, considered either divine or demoniac.
After these arose the priests, distinguished from the people
by special dress and diet, who established in the various tribes
temples, altars, and cults, under their own control. Then
there were the saints, pious penitents or Nazarites, who led
an ascetic life secluded from the masses, hoping thus to obtain
higher powers over the will of the Deity. All these entertained
more or less clearly the notion that they stood in
closer relation to the Deity than the common people, whom
they then excluded from the sanctuary and all access to the
Deity.
</p>

<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>

<p>
The Mosaic cult, in the so-called Priestly Code, was founded
upon this stage of religious life, forming a hierarchical institution
like those of other ancient nations. It differed
from them, however, in one essential point. The prime element
in the cult of other nations was magic, consisting of
oracle, incantation and divination, but this was entirely contrary
to the principles of the Jewish faith. On the other
hand, all the rites and ceremonies handed down from remote
antiquity were placed in the service of Israel's holy God, in
order to train His people into the highest moral purity.
The patriarchs and prophets, who are depicted in Scripture
as approaching God in prayer and hearing His voice in reply,
come under the category of saints or elect ones, above the
mass of the people.
</p>

<p>
4. Foreign as the entire idea of sacrifice is to our mode of
religious thought, to antiquity it appeared as the only means
of intercourse with the Deity. <q>In every place offerings are
presented unto My name, even pure oblations,</q><note place='foot'>Mal. I, 11.</note> says
the prophet Malachi in the name of Israel's God. Even from a
higher point of view the underlying idea seems to be of a
simple offering laid upon the altar. Such were the meal-offering
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>minha</foreign>);<note place='foot'>With its
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>azkarah</foreign>, the flame of
incense rising in <q>pyramidal</q> form, generally
translated <q>memorial,</q> or <q>memorial-part.</q> Lev. II, 9, 16. For sacrifice
as means of atonement see Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>,
295-301.</note> the burnt offering (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>olah</foreign>),
which sends its pillar of smoke up toward heaven, symbolizing the idea of
self-sacrifice; while the various sin-offerings
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hattath</foreign> or
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>asham</foreign>)
expressed the desire to propitiate an offended Deity.
However, since the sacrificial cult was always dominated by
the priesthood in Israel as well as other nations, the lawgiver
made no essential changes in the traditional practice and
terminology. Thus it was left to the consciousness of the
people to find a deeper spiritual meaning in the sacrifices
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
instead of stating one directly. The want was supplied only
by the later Haggadists who tried to create a symbolism of the
sacrificial cult. The laying on of hands by the individual who
brought the offering, seems to have been a genuine symbolic
expression of self-surrender. In the case of sin-offerings the
Mosaic cult added a higher meaning by ordering a preceding
confession of sin. Here, indeed, the individual entered into
personal communion with God through his prayer for pardon,
even though the priest performed the act of expiation for
him.
</p>

<p>
5. The great prophets of Israel alone recognized that
the entire sacrificial system was out of harmony with the
true spirit of Judaism and led to all sorts of abuses, above
all to a misconception of the worship of God, which requires
the uplifting of the heart. In impassioned language, therefore,
they hurled words of scathing denunciation against the
practice and principle of ritualism: <q rend='pre'>I hate, I despise your
feasts, and I will take no delight in your solemn assemblies.</q>
</p>

<p>
Yea, though ye offer Me burnt-offerings and your meal-offerings,
I will not accept them; Neither will I regard the
peace-offerings of your fat beasts.
</p>

<p>
Take thou away from Me the noise of thy songs; and let
Me not hear the melody of thy psalteries.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='post'>But let justice well up as waters, and righteousness as a
mighty stream.</q><note place='foot'>Amos V, 21-24.</note>
</p>

<p>
Thus speaks Amos in the name of the Lord. And Hosea:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>For I desire mercy, and not sacrifice, and the knowledge
of God rather than burnt-offerings.</q><note place='foot'>Hosea VI, 6.</note>
</quote>

<p>
Isaiah spoke in a similar vein:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto
Me? saith the Lord; I am full of the burnt-offerings of
rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the
blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats....</q>
</p>

<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>

<p>
Bring me no more vain oblations; it is an offering of
abomination unto Me; new moon and sabbath, the holding
of convocations&mdash;I cannot endure iniquity along with the
solemn assembly....
</p>

<p>
And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide Mine eyes
from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear;
your hands are full of blood.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='post'>Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings
From before Mine eyes, cease to do evil; learn to do well;
seek justice, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead
for the widow.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. I, 11-18.</note>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Most striking of all are the words of Jeremiah, spoken in
the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: <q>Add your
burnt-offerings unto your sacrifices, and eat ye flesh. For
I spoke not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the
day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, but this thing I commanded
them, saying; <q>Hearken unto My voice, and I will be your
God, and ye shall be My people; and walk ye in all the way
that I command you, that it may be well with you.</q></q><note place='foot'>Jer.
VII, 21-23.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. However, the mere rejection of the sacrificial cult was
quite negative, and did not satisfy the normal need for communion
with God. Therefore the various codes established
a sort of compromise between the prophetic ideal and the
priestly practice, in which the ideal was by no means supreme.
Sometimes the prophetic spirit stirred the soul of inspired psalmists,
and their lips echoed forth again the divine revelation:
</p>

<p>
<q>Hear, O My people, and I will speak; O Israel, and I
will testify against thee: God, thy God, am I. I will not
reprove thee for thy sacrifices; and thy burnt-offerings are
continually before Me. I will take no bullock out of thy
house, nor he-goats out of thy folds. For every beast of the
forest is Mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills....
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
Do I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of
goats?</q><note place='foot'>Ps. L, 7-13.</note>
Another psalmist says: <q>Sacrifice and meal-offering
thou hast no delight in; Mine ears hast Thou
opened; burnt-offering and sin-offering hast Thou not
required.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XL, 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
Still, the sacrificial cult was too deeply rooted in the life of
the people to be disturbed by the voice of the prophets or
the words of a few psalmists. It was connected with the
Temple, and the Temple was the center of the social life of
the nation. The few faint voices of protest went practically
unheeded. The priestly pomp of sacrifice could only be displaced
by the more elevating and more spiritual devotion of
the entire congregation in prayer, and this process demanded
a new environment, and a group of men with entirely new
ideas.
</p>

<p>
7. The need of a deeper devotion through prayer was not
felt until the Exile. There altar and priesthood were no
more, but the words of the prophets and the songs of the
Levites remained to kindle the people's longing for God with
a new zeal. Until then prayer was rare and for special occasions.
Hannah's prayer at Shiloh filled even the high
priest with amazement.<note place='foot'>I Sam. I,
13-14.</note> The prophets alone interceded in
behalf of the people, because the ordinary man was not considered
sufficiently clean from sin to approach the Deity in
prayer. But on foreign soil, where sacrifices could not be
offered to the God of Israel, the harp of David resounded with
solemn songs expressing the national longing toward God.
The most touching psalms of penitence and thanksgiving date
from the exile. A select class of devout men, called the godly
or pious ones, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hasidim</foreign> or
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Anavim</foreign>,<note place='foot'>Often
mentioned in the Psalms, under such terms as <q>the congregation
of the righteous,</q> <q>the holy ones,</q> <q>the devout ones,</q>
etc.</note> assembled by the rivers
of Babylon for regular prayer, turning their faces toward
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
Jerusalem, that the God of Israel might answer them from
His ancient seat.<note place='foot'>See I Kings VIII,
48; Dan. VI, 11.</note> Thus the great seer of the exile voiced the
hope for <q>a house of prayer for all peoples</q> to stand in
the very place where the sacrifices were offered to
God.<note place='foot'>Isa. LVI, 7.</note>
The congregation of Hasidim elaborated a liturgy under the
Persian influence, in which prayer was the chief element, and
the secondary part, the instruction from the Torah and the
monitions of the prophets. The Synagogue, the house of
meeting for the people, spread all over the world, and by its
light of truth and glow of fervor it soon eclipsed the Temple,
with all its worldly pomp. In fact, the priesthood of the
Temple were finally compelled to make concessions to the
lay movement of the Hasidim. They added a prayer
service, morning and evening, to the daily sacrifices, and
opened the Hall of Hewn Stones, the meeting place of
the High Court of Justice, as a Synagogue in charge of the
priests.<note place='foot'>Tamid V, 1; comp. Kohler: Monatsschr., 1893, p. 441.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. In this manner the ancient sacrificial cult, thus long
monopolized by the priesthood, was gradually superseded
by congregational prayer which was no longer confined to a
certain time or class, and justly called by the rabbis <q>a service
of the heart.</q><note place='foot'>Sifre Deut. 41: <q>What
is meant by, <q>To serve Him with all your heart?</q>
this is prayer.</q></note> Moreover, the Temple itself lost much
of its hold upon the hearts of the people, owing to the more
spiritual character of the Synagogue. Thus the torch of the
Roman soldiery which turned the Temple into a heap of ashes
broke only the national bond, but left the religious bond of the
Synagogue unbroken. True, the hope for the restoration of
the Temple with the priestly sacrifices was not relinquished,
and officially the daily prayers were considered only a <q>temporary
substitute</q> for the divinely ordained sacrificial
cult.<note place='foot'>Ber. 26 a.</note>
</p>

<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>

<p>
Nevertheless, the deeper religious consciousness of the people
felt that the celestial gate of divine mercy opens only to
prayer, which emanates from the innermost depths of the
soul. Accordingly, some of the Haggadists try to prove from
Scripture that prayer ranks above sacrifice,<note place='foot'>Ber.
32 b; Midr. to Sam. I, 7.</note> while others
even identify worship with prayer.<note place='foot'>P.
d. R. El. XVI.</note> They represent God as
appearing to Moses in the guise of one who leads the congregation
in prayer, His face covered by the prayer-shawl
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>tallith</foreign>),
in order to teach man for all time the mode and power of
prayer.<note place='foot'>R. ha Sh. 17 b.</note>
Still these remain isolated expressions of an underlying
sentiment; on the whole, the rabbis regarded the
Mosaic legislation, with its emphasis on sacrifice, far too
highly to accord prayer any but a secondary place, either
accompanying sacrifice or as its substitute.<note place='foot'>Meg.
31 b; Yer. Taan. IV, 68 c. But compare Isaac Aboab: <hi rend='italic'>Menorath
ha Maor</hi>, III, 3 a; Bahya ben Asher: <hi rend='italic'>Kad ha Kemah</hi>,
art. <hi rend='italic'>Tefillah</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. Through many centuries, then, the belief in the divine
origin of the sacrificial cult remained, even though it could
no longer be carried out. The liturgy contained prayers
for the speedy restoration of the Temple and the sacrifices,
which were preserved by tradition, and nowhere was even an
echo heard of the bold words of Jeremiah denying the divine
character of the sacrifices,<note place='foot'>Jer.
VI, 22.</note> even though the idea of the restoration
of the old cult must have been repugnant to thinkers.
The sages of former ages could only resort to a compromise
or an allegorical interpretation. It is noteworthy that the
Haggadist Rabbi Levi considered the sacrifices a concession
of God to the people, who were disposed to idolatry, in order
to win them gradually for the pure monotheistic
ideal.<note place='foot'>Lev. R. XXII, 5.</note> This
view was adopted by the Church Fathers, and later by Maimonides
and other medieval thinkers. On the other hand,
an allegorical meaning was assigned to the sacrifices by Philo
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
and Jehuda ha Levi, as well as by Samson Raphael Hirsch in
modern times.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>, II,
25, see note by Cassel; <hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>, III, 32; comp. Midrash Tadshe
12; I, 177 f.; comp. Hebrews IX-X; <hi rend='italic'>Barnabas</hi>,
I, 25. S. R. Hirsch in <hi rend='italic'>Horeb</hi>
p. 639 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
Reform Judaism, recognizing the results of Biblical research
and the law of religious progress, adopted the prophetic view
of the sacrifices. Accordingly, the sacrificial cult of the
Mosaic code has no validity for the liberal movement, and
all reference to it has been eliminated from the reform liturgy.
In this, however, the connection with the past was by no means
severed. The main part of the service remains the same,
although much of the character and many of the details have
been changed.<note place='foot'>See Philipson:
<hi rend='italic'>The Reform Movement in Judaism</hi> for the various views
and debates on sacrifice and prayer. I. Elbogen: <hi rend='italic'>D. jued. Gottesdienst i.
s. geschichtl. Entwicklung</hi>, p. 374 f., 435 f., is written in a more conservative spirit
and unfavorable to American Reform Judaism. Comp. for the traditional
liturgy: Dembitz: <hi rend='italic'>Jewish Services in the Synagogue and Home</hi>,
especially on the Prayerbook, p. 233-246, and for America,
497-499.</note> Only the allusions to the Temple worship and
the sacrifices were eliminated, and the entire form of the
service was made more solemn and inspiring <q>by combining
ancient time-honored formulas with modern prayers and
meditations in the vernacular and in the spirit of the age.</q>
The morning and evening services retained their places, while
the additional festal service (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>mussaf</foreign>)
was abrogated, because
it stood for the additional festal sacrifice. As to the voluntary
element in the old sacrificial system, the peace, sin, and
thank-offerings, this is replaced in the reform ritual, as in
the traditional practice, by private devotions for special
occasions, to be selected by the individual.
</p>

<p>
The traditional Jewish prayer has certainly a wondrous
force. It remains a source of inspiration from which the
religious consciousness will ever draw new strength and
vitality. It echoes the voice of Israel singing the song of
redemption by the Red Sea: <q>This is My God, and I will
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
glorify Him; My father's God, and I will exalt
Him.</q><note place='foot'>Ex. XV, 2.</note>
Consequently our liturgy must ever respond to a double
demand; it must throb with the spirit of continuity with
our great past, to make us feel one with our fathers of yore;
and it must express clearly and fully our own views and needs,
our convictions and our hopes.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLII. The Nature and Purpose of Prayer</head>

<p>
1. Prayer is the expression of man's longing and yearning
for God in times of dire need and of overflowing joy, an outflow
of the emotions of the soul in its dependence on God,
the ever-present Helper, the eternal Source of its existence.
Springing from the deepest necessity of human weakness, the
expression of a momentary wish, prayer is felt to be the proud
prerogative of man as the child of God, and at last it becomes
adoration of the Most High, whose wisdom and whose paternal
love and goodness inspire man with confidence and love.
</p>

<p>
2. Every prayer is offered on the presumption that it will be
heard by God on high. <q>O Thou that hearest prayer, unto
Thee doth all flesh come,</q> sings the Psalmist.<note place='foot'>Ps.
LXV, 3. See Wm. James: <hi rend='italic'>Varieties of Rel. Experience</hi>, 463-477;
Foster: <hi rend='italic'>Function of Religion</hi>, 183-185; Abelson:
<hi rend='italic'>Jewish Mysticism</hi>, p. 15 and
elsewhere.</note> No doubt of
the efficacy of prayer can arise in the devout spirit. There
can be only the question whether, and how far, the Deity can
allow its decrees to be influenced by human wishes. Childlike
faith anticipates divine interference in the natural order at
any time, because it has not yet attained the conception of a
moral order in the universe and, therefore, expects from prayer
also miraculous effects on life. As the Deity can suddenly
send or withhold rain or drought, barrenness or birth, life or
death, so the inference is that the man of God can do the same
with his prayer. This is the point of view of the Biblical and
Talmudic periods, as well as of the entire ancient world. It
seems almost childish to our religious consciousness when,
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
according to Talmudic tradition, the high priest petitioned
God in the Sanctuary on the Day of Atonement for a year
rich in rain and blessed with sunshine and with dew, and at the
same time expressed the entreaty that the prayers of travelers
for dry or cool weather should find no hearing.<note place='foot'>Yoma
53 b.</note> That the
prayers of the pious may alter God's decree is not doubted for
a moment by the rabbis; only they insist that God has taken
into account beforehand the efficacy of this prayer in deciding
the fate of the pious, in order that they may petition for that
which He actually plans to do. <q>God longs for the prayer of
the pious</q>; for that reason, they say, the Mothers of Israel
were afflicted with barrenness, until the prayers of the Patriarchs
had accomplished the transformation in their
constitutions.<note place='foot'>Yeb. 64 a; Ex. R. XXI, 6.</note>
On the other hand, the rabbis warn against
excessive pondering over prayer and its efficacy, as through it
that childlike faith would be weakened, which is the basis of
all prayer.<note place='foot'>Ber. 55 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. According to the rabbinic viewpoint, prayer has the
power to reverse every heavenly decree, inasmuch as it appeals
from the punitive justice of God, which has decided thus, to
His attributes of grace and mercy, which can at any time effect
a change. When the prophet Isaiah came to King Hezekiah
with the message: <q>Set thine house in order, for thou shalt
die,</q> he replied, <q>Finish thy message and go; I have received
the tradition from my royal ancestor David that, even when
the sword already touches the neck, man shall not desist from
an appeal to the divine mercy.</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 10 a.</note> Nay more, the rabbis
believed that God Himself prays, saying, <q>Oh, that My mercy
shall prevail over My justice!</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 7 a.</note> Only after the divine
judgment has been executed prayer becomes vain. In general,
the entire Talmudic period ascribed miraculous power to
prayer, especially the prayers of the pious, like the popular
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
saint Onias or Hanina ben Dosa.<note place='foot'>Taan.
III, 8; Ber. V, 6; Babl. 34 b; Yer. 9 d.</note> In many such cases the
invocation of God was combined with the use of the sacred
name, the tetragrammaton, to which magical powers were
ascribed.<note place='foot'>Pes. R. XXII, p. 114 b; Midr.
Teh. Ps. XCI, 8; see Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>,
156; 42.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. The two attributes of God, Justice and Mercy, correspond
to the double nature of mankind, as the sinful man, who
deserves punishment, is called to account by the former, while
the righteous man may appeal to the latter. Accordingly, the
efficacy of prayer could be so explained that, before it can
influence the decision of God, it demands the reformation of
man. While the unregenerate man meets an evil destiny,
the reformed man has become a different being, and hence instead
of justice mercy will control his fate. Albo pleads for
this view of prayer, when he cites the Talmudic incident about
R. Meir. It is said that R. Meir interceded for the people of
Mimla, who all seemed to have been doomed to die on attaining
manhood because they inherited the curse of the priestly
family of Eli.<note place='foot'>I Sam. II, 31.</note>
But he also recommended to them that they
should devote their lives to worthy deeds, as it is said in the
Proverbs:<note place='foot'>Prov. XVI, 32.</note> <q>The
hoary head is a crown of glory, it is found
in the way of righteousness.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. R.
LIX, 1; Yeb. 105 a, where R. Johanan ben Zakkai is mentioned
instead of R. Meir; Albo: <hi rend='italic'>Ikkarim</hi>, IV, 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
Other thinkers ascribe to prayer the power to change the
fate determined by the stars, because it exalts man into a
higher sphere of godliness, exactly like the spirit of prophecy.
Of course, this conception is connected with the belief in
astrology, which swayed even clear thinkers like Ibn
Ezra.<note place='foot'>See Steinschneider: <hi rend='italic'>Abraham Ibn Ezra</hi>,
126 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. According to our modern thinking there can be no question
of any influence upon a Deity exalted above time and
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
space, omniscient, unchangeable in will and action, by the
prayer of mortals. Prayer can exert power only over the relation
of man to God, not over God Himself. This indicates the
nature and purpose of prayer. Man often feels lonely and
forlorn in a world which overpowers him, to which he feels
superior, and yet which he cannot master. Therefore he longs
for that unseen Spirit of the universe, with whom alone he feels
himself akin, and in whom alone he finds peace and bliss amid
life's struggle and unrest. This longing is both expressed and
satisfied in prayer. Following the natural impulse of his
soul, man must pour out before his God all his desires and
sighs, all the emotions of grief and delight which sway his
heart, in order that he may find rest, like a child at its mother's
bosom. Therefore the childlike mind believes that God can
be induced to come down from His heavenly heights to offer
help, and that He can be moved and influenced in human
fashion. The truth is that every genuine prayer lifts man up
toward God, satisfies the desire for His hallowing presence,
unlocks the heavenly gate of mercy and bliss, and bestows
upon man the beatific and liberating sense of being a child of
God. The intellect may question the effect of prayer upon the
physical, mental, or social constitution of man, or may declare
prayer to be pious self-deception. The religious spirit experiences
in prayer the soaring up of the soul toward union with
God in consecrated moments of our mortal pilgrimage. This
is no deception. The man who prays receives from the Godhead,
toward whom he fervently lifts himself, the power to
defy fate, to conquer sin, misery, and death. <q>The Lord is
nigh to all them that call upon Him, to all that call upon Him
in truth.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. CXLV, 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. To pray, then, is to look up to God and to pour out before
Him one's wishes, thoughts, sorrows, and joys. Certainly the
All-knowing does not require to be told by us what we desire
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
or what we need. <q>For there is not a word in my tongue,
but lo, O Lord, Thou knowest it altogether.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
CXXXIX, 4.</note> But we mortals
merely aspire toward Him who bears the world on His eternal
arms, to express in His presence our agony and our jubilation,
because we are certain of His paternal sympathy. When we
praise and extol Him for the happiness and the many pleasures
which He has granted us, He becomes the Partaker and Protector
of our fortune, just as He is our sympathetic Helper
when we cry out to Him under the burden of sin or grief, in the
anxiety of danger or of guilt. Every genuine prayer realizes
deeply the truth of the words, <q>Cast thy burden upon the
Lord, and He will sustain thee.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. LV, 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. Self-expression before God in prayer has thus a double
effect; it strengthens faith in God's love and kindness, as
well as in His all-wise and all-bountiful prescience. But it also
chastens the desires and feelings of man, teaching him to
banish from his heart all thoughts of self-seeking and sin, and
to raise himself toward the purity and the freedom of the
divine will and demand. The essence of every prayer of supplication
is that one should be in unison with the divine will,
to sum up all the wishes of the heart in the one phrase, <q>Do
that which is good in Thine own eyes, O Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 29 b;
Tos. Ber. III, 7; comp. Albo: <hi rend='italic'>Ikkarim</hi>, IV, 24.</note> On the
other hand, only the prayer which avoids impure thoughts and
motives can venture to approach a holy God, as the sages infer
from the words of Job, <q>There is no violence in my hands, and
my prayer is pure.</q><note place='foot'>Job XVI, 17; Ex. R. XXII, 4;
comp. Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>, 228.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. Every prayer, teach the sages, should begin with the
praise of God's greatness, wisdom, and goodness, in order that
man should learn submission and implicit confidence before
he proffers his requests.<note place='foot'>Ab. Z. 76.</note>
While looking up to the divine Ideal
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
of holiness and perfection, he will strive to emulate Him, and
seek to grow ever nearer to the holy and the perfect. But
only when he prays with and for others, that is, in public
worship, will he realize that he is a member of a greater whole,
for then he prays only for that which advances the welfare of
all. <q>He who prays with the community,</q> say the rabbis,
<q>will have his prayer granted.</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 8 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
Another saying of theirs is that he who prays should have his
face directed to the sanctuary, and when he stands on its
sacred precincts, he should turn his face toward the Holy of
Holies.<note place='foot'>Ber. 30 a.</note>
By this they meant that the attitude of the suppliant
should ever be toward the highest, making the soul soar up to
the Highest and Holiest in reverent awe and adoration, transforming
the worshiper into a new character, pure from all
dross.
</p>

<p>
9. Therefore prayer offered with the community upon the
sanctified ground of the house of God exerts a specially powerful
influence upon the individual. In the silent chamber the
oppressed spirit may find calm and composure in prayer; but
the pure atmosphere of heavenly freedom and bliss is attained
with overwhelming might only by the united worship of hundreds
of devout adorers, which rings out like the roaring of
majestic billows: <q>The Lord is in His holy temple; let all the
earth keep silence before Him.</q><note place='foot'>Hab.
II, 20.</note> The familiar strains from
days of yore touch the deep, long-silent chords of the heart,
and awaken dormant sentiments and repressed thoughts,
endowing the soul with new wings, to lift itself up toward
God, the Father, from whom it had felt itself alienated. In
the ardor of communal worship the traditional words of the
prayer-book obtain invigorating power; the heart is newly
strengthened; the covenant with heaven sealed anew. To
such communal prayer, which springs from the heart, the
rabbis refer the Biblical words, <q>to serve Him with the whole
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
heart.</q><note place='foot'>Sifre Deut. 41.</note>
The synagogal worship exerts an ennobling influence
upon the spirit of the individual as well as that of the
community. For after all the main object is that the soul
which aspires toward God may learn to find God. <q>Seek ye
the Lord while He may be found; call ye upon Him while He
is near.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. LV, 6.</note>
No man is so poor as he who calls in agony: <q>O
God!</q> and to whom neither the heaven above nor the heart
within answers, <q>Behold, God is here.</q> Nor is any man so rich
with all his possessions as he who realizes, like the Psalmist,
that <q>the nearness of God is the true good,</q> and imbued with
this thought exclaims, <q>Whom have I in heaven but Thee?
And beside Thee I desire none upon earth.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. LXXIII, 25, 28.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_XLIII'/>
<head>Chapter XLIII. Death and the Future Life</head>

<p>
1. The vision of man is directed upwards and forwards; he
will not resign himself to decay in the dust like the beast.
As he bears in his breast the consciousness of a higher divine
world, he is equally confident of his own continuity after
death. He cannot and will not believe that with the giving
up of his last living breath his being would become dust like
that of the animal; or that his soul, which has hitherto accomplished
and planned so much, should now suddenly cease
altogether to exist. The longing for a future life, however
expressed, has filled him and buoyed him up since the very
beginning of history. Even the most primitive tribe does not
allow its dead to lie and rot like the carcasses of the beast,
but lays them to rest in the grave with all their possessions,
in the expectation that somewhere and somehow, under, over
or beyond the earth, they will continue their lives, even in a
better form than before.
</p>

<p>
This longing for immortality implanted in the human soul is
so represented in the legend of Paradise that the tree whose
fruit bestowed upon the celestial beings the gift of eternal
life&mdash;like the Greek ambrosia, <q>the food of the gods</q>&mdash;was
originally intended for mankind also in the divine <q>Garden
of Bliss.</q> But after man fell through sin, all access to it was
denied him, in order that he might not stretch out his hand for
it and thereby attain that immortality which was vouchsafed
only to divine beings.<note place='foot'>Gen. III, 22.</note>
According to his original destiny,
therefore, man should live forever; and, just as legend allows
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
those divinely elected, like Enoch and Elijah,<note place='foot'>Gen.
V, 24; II Kings II, 1.</note> to ascend to
heaven alive, so at a later period prophecy predicts a time when
God will annihilate death forever.<note place='foot'>Isa.,
XXV, 8.</note> Accordingly, through the
power of his divine soul man possesses a claim to immortality,
to eternal life with God, the <q>Fountain of life.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. It was just this keen longing for an energetic life on
earth, this mighty yearning to <q>walk before God in the land
of the living,</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XXXVIII, 11;
Ps. CXVI, 9.</note> which made it more difficult for Judaism to
brighten the <q>valley of the shadow of death</q> and to elevate
the vague notion of a shadowy existence in the hereafter into
a special religious teaching. Until long after the Exile the
Jewish people shared the view of the entire ancient world,&mdash;both
the Semitic nations, such as the Babylonians and Phœnicians,
and the Aryans, such as the Greeks and Romans,&mdash;that
the dead continue to exist in the shadowy realm of the
nether world (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Sheol</foreign>),
the land of no return
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Beliyaal</foreign>),<note place='foot'>Ps.
XVIII, 5, and J. E., art. Belial.</note> of eternal
silence (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Dumah</foreign>), and oblivion
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Neshiyah</foreign>),<note place='foot'>Ps.
CXV, 17; LXXXVIII, 13.</note> a dull, ghostly
existence without clear consciousness and without any awakening
to a better life. We must, however, not overlook the fact
that even in these most primitive conceptions a certain imperishability
is ascribed to man as marking his superiority over the
animal world, which is altogether abandoned to decay. Hence
the belief in the existence of the shades, the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Refaim</foreign> in
Sheol.<note place='foot'>Isa. XXVI, 14, 19; Ps. LXXXVIII,
11; Prov. IX, 18; Job XXVI, 5.</note>
But throughout the Biblical period no ethical idea yet permeated
this conception, and no attempt was made to transform
the nether world into a place of divine judgment, of
recompense for the good and evil deeds accomplished on
earth,<note place='foot'>Ps. XLIX, 15.</note>
as did the Babylonians and Egyptians. Both the prophets and
the Mosaic code persist in applying their promises and threats,
in fact, their entire view of retribution, to this world, nor do
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
they indicate by a single word the belief in a judgment or a
weighing of actions in the world to come.
</p>

<p>
3. Whether the Mosaic-prophetic writings be regarded from
the standpoint of traditional faith or of historical criticism,
the limitation of their teaching and exhortation to the present
life can be considered narrowness only by biased expounders
of the <q>Old Testament.</q> The Israelitish lawgiver could not
have been altogether ignorant of the Egyptian or the Babylonian
conceptions of the future world. Obviously Israel's
prophets and lawgivers deliberately avoided giving any
definite expression to the common belief in a future life after
death, especially as the Canaanitish magicians and necromancers
used this popular belief to carry on their superstitious
practices, so dangerous to all moral progress.<note place='foot'>See
Isa. VIII, 19; XXVIII, 15, 18; I Sam. XXIX, 7-14.</note> The great
task which prophetic Judaism set itself was to place the entire
life of men and nations in the service of the God of justice and
holiness; there was thus no motive to extend the dominion
of JHVH, the God of life, to the underworld, the playground
of the forces of fear and superstition. As late as the author
of the book of Job and of the earlier Psalms, Sheol was known
as the despot of the nether world with its demoniacal forms,
as the <q>king of terrors</q> who extends his scepter over the
dead.<note place='foot'>Job XVIII, 14; Ps. XLIX, 15.</note>
Only gradually does the thought find expression in
the Psalms that the Omnipotent Ruler of heaven could also
rescue the soul out of the power of Sheol,<note place='foot'>Ps.
XLIX, 16; Job XIV, 13.</note> and that His omnipresence
included likewise the nether world.<note place='foot'>Ps.
CXXXIX, 8.</note> In this trustful
spirit the Hasidic Psalmist expressed the hope: <q>Thou wilt
not abandon my soul to Sheol, neither wilt Thou suffer Thy
godly one to see the pit. Thou makest me to know the path
of life; in Thy presence is fulness of joy; in Thy right hand
bliss forevermore.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XVI, 10-11;
Hosea XIII is a late emendation of the text.</note>
</p>

<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>

<p>
4. Biblical Judaism evinced such a powerful impetus toward
a complete and blissful life with God, that the center and purpose
of existence could not be transferred to the hereafter,
as in other systems of belief, but was found in the desire to
work out the life here on earth to its fullest possible development.
Virtue and wisdom, righteousness and piety, signify
and secure true life; vice and folly, iniquity and sin, lead to
death and annihilation. This is the ever recurring burden of
the popular as well as of the prophetic and priestly wisdom of
Israel.<note place='foot'>Deut. XXX, 19; Jer. XXI, 8; Ezek. XX, 11; Lev. XVIII, 5; Ps.
XXXIV, 3; Prov. III, 22; V, 5 f.</note> In the song of thanks of King Hezekiah after his
recovery, the Jewish soul expresses itself, when he
says:<note place='foot'>Isa. XXXVIII, 10-20.</note> <q>I
said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the
living.... But Thou hast delivered my soul from the pit
of corruption. For the nether world cannot praise Thee;
death cannot celebrate Thee. The living, the living, he shall
praise Thee, as I do this day. The father to the children shall
make known Thy truth.</q> Therefore the author of the seventy-third
Psalm, ennobled by trials, finds sufficient comfort and
happiness in the presence of God that he can spurn all earthly
treasures.<note place='foot'>Ps. LXXIII, 25-28.</note>
Job, too, in his affliction longed for death as release
from all earthly pain and sorrow, but not to bring him a state of
rest and peace like the Nirvana of the Indian beggar-monk, or
an outlook into a better world to come. Such an awakening to
a new life seems to him unthinkable,&mdash;although many commentators
have often endeavored to read such a hope into
certain of his expressions.<note place='foot'>Job
XIX, 25 f., challenges God to be his vindicator on earth or on his tomb,
testifying to his righteousness. Resurrection is denied directly: VII, 8-21;
XIV, 12-22. The whole argument of the book excludes the
thought.</note> Instead, his belief in God as the
Ruler of the infinite world, with His lofty moral purpose far
outreaching all human wisdom, lent him courage and power
for further effort and persistent striving on earth. Since to this
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
suffering hero, impelled to deeds by his own energy, life is a
continuous battle, a hereafter as a <q>world of reward and punishment</q>
can hardly solve the great enigma of human existence
in a satisfactory manner for him. The wise ones&mdash;says
a Talmudic maxim&mdash;find rest neither in this world nor
in the world to come, but <q>they shall ascend from strength to
strength, until they appear before God on Zion.</q><note place='foot'>Ber.
64 a, with ref. to Ps. LXXXIV, 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. In the course of time, however, the question of existence
after death demanded more and more a satisfactory answer.
Under the severe political and social oppression that came
upon the Jewish people, the pious ones failed to see a just
equation of man's doings and his destiny in this life. The
bitter disappointment which they experienced made them
look to the God of justice for a future, when virtue would
receive its due reward and vice its befitting punishment. The
community of the pious especially awaited in vain the realization
of the great messianic hope with which the prophetic
words of comfort had filled their hearts. They had willingly
offered up their lives for the truth of Judaism, and the God of
faithfulness could not deceive them. Surely the shadowy
realm of the nether world could not be the end of all. So the
voice of promise came to them from the book of Isaiah,
where these encouraging and comforting words were inserted
by a later hand: <q>Thy dead shall live; thy (My) dead bodies
shall arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust, for
Thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast forth
the shades.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XXVI, 19. Read,
<q><emph>thy</emph> dead instead of <emph>My</emph> dead.</q> The translation
given here differs from the new translation.</note> Even before
this time the God of Israel had
been praised as <q>He who killeth and maketh alive, who
bringeth down to Sheol, and bringeth up.</q><note place='foot'>I
Sam. II, 6.</note> So was also the
miraculous power of restoring the dead to life ascribed to the
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
prophets.<note place='foot'>II Kings IV,
20-37.</note> Furthermore, the vision of the prophet Ezekiel
concerning the dry bones which arose to new life, in which he
beheld the divine revelation of the approaching event of the
restoration of the Jewish nation,<note place='foot'>Ezek.
XXXVII, 1-14.</note> shows how familiar the idea
of resurrection must have been to the people. Hence the
minds of the Jewish people were sufficiently prepared to adopt
the Persian belief in the resurrection of the dead.
</p>

<p>
6. This, however, led to a tremendous process of transformation
in Judaism with a wide chasm between Mosaism
and Rabbinism, or, more accurately, between the Sadducees,
who adhered to the letter of the law, and the Pharisees, who
embodied the progressive spirit of the people. On the one
hand, Jesus ben Sira, who at the close of his book speaks with
great admiration of the high-priest Simon the Just as his contemporary,
knew as yet nothing of a future life, and like
Koheleth saw the end of all human existence in the dismal
realm of the nether world. Yet at the same time, the Hasidim
or pious ones and their successors, the Pharisees, were
developing after the Persian pattern the thought of a divine
judgment day after death, when the just were to awaken to
eternal life, and the evil-doers to shame and everlasting
contempt.<note place='foot'>Dan. XII, 2, and comp. II Macc.
VII, 9-36; XII, 43, and the Apocalyptic
books such as Enoch, Test. Twelve Patriarchs, Jubilees, Psalms of Solomon,
IV Ezra and Baruch Apocalypse, whereas I Macc., Judith and Tobit, belonging
to the Sadducean circles, never allude to the future life.</note>
This advanced moral view, frequently overlooked,
transformed the ancient Semitic Sheol from the realm of
shades to a place of punishment for sinners, and thus invested
it with an ethical purpose.<note place='foot'>Passages like Ps.
IX, 18; XI, 6; XLIX, 15, comp. with Isa. XXXIII,
14; LXV, 24; Mal. III, 19, lent themselves especially to this conception of
Sheol as a fiery place of punishment identified afterwards with
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Gehinnom</foreign>.
Jer. VII, 31 f.; XIX, 6. See J. E., art. Gehenna, and R.
H. Charles, <hi rend='italic'>Hebrew, Jewish and Christian Eschatology</hi>,
2d, 1913, p. 75 f., 132, 160 f., 292 f.</note> After this the various Biblical
names for the nether world became the various divisions of
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
hell.<note place='foot'>Midr. Teh. Ps. XI, 5-6;
Erub. 19 a.</note> Indeed, the Psalmists and the Proverbs had announced
to the wicked their destruction in Sheol, and on the other
hand held out for the godly the hope of deliverance from Sheol
and a beatific sight of God in the land of the living. Thus the
transition was prepared for the new world-conception. All the
promises and threats of the law and the prophets, when they
did not receive fulfillment in this world, appeared now to
point forward to the world to come. Moreover, the Pharisees
in their disputes with the Sadducees made use of every reference,
however slight, to the future life,&mdash;even of such passages
as those which speak of the Patriarchs as receiving the
promise of possessing the Holy Land, as if they were still alive,&mdash;as
proofs of the continued life of the dead, or of their
resurrection.<note place='foot'>Sanh. 90 b; comp. Matt. XXII, 32.</note>
Thus it came about that the leading authorities of
rabbinic Judaism were in the position to declare in the Mishnah:
<q>He who says that the belief in the resurrection of the dead is
not founded on the Torah (and therefore does not accept it)
shall have no share in the world to come.</q><note place='foot'>Sanh.
X, 1; see J. E., art. Resurrection, and Neumark, art. Ikkarim in l. c.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. The founders of the liturgy of the Synagogue, in opposition
to the Sadducees, formulated therefore the belief in resurrection
in the second of the <q>Eighteen (or Seven) Benedictions</q>
of the daily prayer in the following words: <q>Thou,
O Lord, art mighty forever. Thou revivest the dead. Thou
art mighty to save. Thou sustainest the living with loving-kindness,
revivest the dead with great mercy, supportest the
falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest Thy
faith to them that sleep in the dust. (This refers to the
Patriarchs, to whom God has promised the land of the future.)
Who is like unto Thee, O Lord of mighty acts, and who
resembleth Thee, O King, who killest and bringest to life, and
causest salvation to spring forth? Yea, faithful art Thou to
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
revive the dead. Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who revivest
the dead.</q> In this prayer dating from the age of the
Maccabees<note place='foot'>See Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>,
44 f., and Abrahams' Notes, LIX.</note>
the Jewish consciousness of two thousand years found
a twofold hope,&mdash;the national and the universally human.
The national hope, which combined the belief in the restoration
of the kingdom of David and of the sacrificial cult with the
resurrection of the dead in the Holy Land, can be understood
only in connection with a historic view of Israel's place in the
world, and is treated in the third part of this book. The
purely human hope for the continuity or the renewal of life
rests on two fundamental problems which must be examined
more closely in the next two chapters. The one belongs to the
province of psychology and considers the question: What is
the eternal divine element in man? The other goes more
deeply into the religious and moral nature of man and considers
the question: Where and how does divine retribution&mdash;reward
or punishment&mdash;take place in human life? To
both of these questions our modern view, with its special aim
toward a unified grasp of the totality of life, requires a special
answer. This can be neither that of rabbinic Judaism, which
rests upon Persian dualism, nor that of medieval philosophy,
which was under the Platonic-Aristotelian influence.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLIV. The Immortal Soul of Man</head>

<p>
1. The idea of immortality has been found in Scripture in a
rather obscure and probably corrupt passage,<note place='foot'>Prov.
XII, 28, comp. LXX, and see Kittel: <hi rend='italic'>Bibl. Hebr.</hi>, note.</note>
<q>In the way of righteousness is life, and in the pathway thereof there is no
death.</q> In the same spirit Aquila, the Bible translator,
who belonged to the school of R. Eliezer and R. Joshua, renders
the equally obscure passage from the Psalms,<note place='foot'>Ps.
XLVIII, 15; see Kittel, note; Midr. Teh. to Psalms and note by Buber;
Yer. Meg. II, 73 b; M. K. 83 b; Lev. R. XI, 9.</note> <q>He will lead
us to immortality,</q> reading <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>al maveth</foreign>,
the Al with <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Alef</foreign>, for
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>al muth</foreign>, the Al with
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ayin</foreign>. There is more solid foundation for
the view that the verse, <q>God created man in His own image</q>
implies that there is an imperishable divine essence in man.
In fact, that which distinguishes man from the animal as well
as from the rest of creation, both the starry worlds above and
the manifold forms of life on earth about him, is his self-conscious
personality, his ego, through which he feels himself
akin with God, the great world-ruling <emph>I Am</emph>. This self-conscious
part of man, which lends to his every manifestation
its value and purpose, can no more disappear into nothingness
than can God, who called into existence this world with all
its phenomena, who set it in motion and directs it. Whatever
thought the crudest of men may have of his ego, his
self,<note place='foot'>See Tylor: <hi rend='italic'>Primitive Culture</hi>, Index, s. v.
Soul.</note> or however the most learned scholar may explain the marvelous
action and interaction of physical and psychical or spiritual
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
forces which culminates in his own self-conscious personality,
it appears certain that this ego cannot cease to be with the
cessation of the bodily functions. There is in us something
divine, immortal, and the only question is wherein it may be
found.
</p>

<p>
2. The creation of man which is described in the Bible in
the words, <q>God formed man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became
a living soul</q><note place='foot'>Gen. II,
7.</note> corresponds to the child-like conceptions of a
primitive people. On the other hand, Scripture speaks of
death in parallel terms, <q>The dust returneth to the earth as it
was, and the spirit (Ruah, the life-giving breath) returneth
unto God who gave it.</q><note place='foot'>Eccl. XII, 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
The conception that the soul enters into man as the breath
of life and leaves him at his death, flying toward heaven like a
bird,<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Birds as
Souls.</note> is quite as ancient and as universal as the other, that the
soul descends into the nether world as a shadowy image of the
body, there to continue a dull existence. The two are related
to one another, and in the Bible, as well as in the literature of
other peoples, they have given rise to diverse definitions of the
soul. This was the point of departure for the development of
the conception of immortality in one or the other direction,
according to whether the body was considered a part of the
personality which somehow survives after death, or only the
spiritual substance of the soul was thought to live on in celestial
regions as something divine. The former led to the theory
of the resurrection of the body and its reunion with the soul;
the latter to the belief in a future life for the soul, after it had
been separated or released from the body.
</p>

<p>
3. When once the soul was felt to be a <q>lamp of the Lord,</q>
filling the body with light when man is awake,<note place='foot'>Prov.
XX, 27.</note> it was easy to
imagine that the soul had escaped and temporarily returned
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
to God in sleep. This induced the teachers of the Synagogue to
prescribe a morning prayer of thanks which reads, <q>Blessed
art Thou, O God, who restorest the souls unto dead
bodies.</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 60 b; Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>,
5.</note> The conception underlying this prayer throws light upon the
entire belief in resurrection. Death to the pious is only a
prolonged sleep. On that account the prophet in the passage
from Isaiah already referred to, as well as the Hasidic author
of the Book of Daniel,<note place='foot'>Isa. XXVI,
19; Dan. XII, 2.</note> could express the hope that <q>those who
sleep in the dust shall awake.</q> As at every awakening from
sleep in the morning, so at the great awakening in the future,
the souls which have departed in death shall return again to
their bodies. These bodies could then hardly be conceived of
as subject to decomposition, and the picture in Ezekiel's
vision of resurrection<note place='foot'>Ezek.
XXXVII, 1 f.</note> had to be accepted as fact. Still R.
Simeon b. Yohai in the especially instructive thirty-fourth
chapter of Pirke de R. Eliezer assumes the complete disintegration
of the body, in order to render the miracle of resurrection
so much the greater. Later still arose the legend of an indestructible
bone of the spinal column, called <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Luz</foreign>, which
was to form the nucleus for the revival of the whole
body.<note place='foot'>Eccl. R. XII, 5: J. E., art. Luz.</note> The
name Luz, which denotes an almond tree and is the name
given in the Bible to a city also,<note place='foot'>Judg.
I, 26.</note> seemed to point to a connection
with two legends, a fabulous city into which death could not
enter,<note place='foot'>Sota 46 b.</note> and the tree of
resurrection in the Osiris cycle.<note place='foot'>Brugsch:
<hi rend='italic'>Religion u. Mythologie d. alt. Aegypten</hi>, p. 618, 634.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. Still, no clear, consistent view of the soul prevailed as
yet in the rabbinic age. The popular belief, influenced by
Persian notions, was that the soul lingers near the body for a
certain time after it has relinquished it, either from three to
seven days or for an entire year.<note place='foot'>P. d.
R. El. XXXIV.</note> Furthermore it was said
that after death the souls hovered between heaven and earth
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
in the form of ghosts, able to overhear the secrets of the future
decreed above and to betray them to human beings below.
In fact, the rabbis of the Talmud, especially the Hasidim,
never hesitated to accept these ghost stories.<note place='foot'>Ber. 18 b.</note> Some
sages of the Talmudic period taught that the souls of the righteous
ascend to heaven, there to dwell under the throne of the divine
majesty, awaiting the time of the renewal of the world, while
the souls of the godless hovered over the horizon of the earth
as restless demoniacal spirits, finally to succumb to the fate of
annihilation, after they had been cast down into the fiery pit
of Gehenna or Sheol.<note place='foot'>Shab. 152 b.</note> Of course, this view, which
prevails in both the Talmud and the New Testament, according to which
the souls of the wicked are to be consumed in the fire of
Gehenna, is inconsistent with the conception of the purely
spiritual nature of the soul.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless at this same epoch we find the higher idea expressed
that the soul is an invisible, god-like essence, pervading
the body as a spiritual force and differing from it in nature in
much the same way as God is differentiated from the
world.<note place='foot'>Midr. Teh. Ps. CIII, 1.</note>
<q>Thou wishest to know where God dwells, who is as high as
are the heavens above the earth; tell me then where dwells
thy soul, which is so near,</q> replied R. Gamaliel
to a heathen.<note place='foot'>Sanh. 39 b.</note>
The prevailing view of the schools is that God implants the
soul in the embryo while in the mother's womb, together with
all the spiritual potentialities which make it human. In fact,
R. Simlai, the third-century Haggadist, advances the Platonic
conception of the preëxistence of the soul, as a being of the
highest intelligence, which sees before birth all things throughout
the world, but forgets all at birth, so that all subsequent
learning is only a recollection.<note place='foot'>Nid. 30 b.</note>
In Hellenistic Judaism especially
the doctrine seems to have been general of the preëxistence
of the soul, or of the creation of all human souls simultaneously
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
with the creation of the world.<note place='foot'>B. Wisd.
VIII, 19; Slav. Enoch XXII, 4, comp, Bousset, l. c., 313 f.</note> Of course, the soul
which emanates from a higher world must be eternal.
</p>

<p>
5. The first clear idea of the nature of the soul came with
the philosophically trained thinkers, who were dependent either
on Plato, main founder of the doctrine of the immortality of
the soul, or on Aristotle, who ascribes immortality only to the
creative spirit of God, the supreme Intelligence as a cosmic
power. The nearest approach to Plato was Philo,<note place='foot'>Philo:
Leg. All. III, 38; Migrat. Abrah. 12; De Concupiscentia, 2; De
Fortitudine, 3; Drummond: <hi rend='italic'>Philo</hi>, I, 318 f.;
Bentwich: <hi rend='italic'>Philo</hi>, 178, 181; Windleband-Tufts
on Plato, 123 f., on Philo, 231, comp. Bousset, l. c., 508; Rhode:
<hi rend='italic'>Psyche</hi>, 557 f.</note> who saw in
the three Biblical names for the soul,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>nefesh</foreign>,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ruah</foreign>, and
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>neshama</foreign>,
the three souls of the Platonic system,&mdash;the sensuous
soul, which has its seat in the abdomen; the courageous or
emotional soul, situated in the breast; and the intellectual
soul, which dwells in the brain and contains the imperishable
divine nature. This last is kept in its physical environment
as in a prison or a grave, and ever yearns for liberation and
reunion with God. The soul of the righteous enters the world
of angels after death; that of the wicked the world of demons.
</p>

<p>
Saadia, who was under the influence of Aristotle interpreted
from the neo-Platonic viewpoint, did not share the Platonic
dualism of matter and spirit, nor did he divide the soul into
three parts, seated in various parts of the human body. He
finds the soul to be a spiritual substance created simultaneously
with the body, and uniting the three forces of the soul distinguished
in Scripture into one inseparable whole, the seat of
which is in the heart,&mdash;wherefore soul and heart are often
synonymous in the Bible. This indivisible substance possesses
a luminous nature like that of the spheres, but is simpler,
finer, and purer than they, and endowed with the power of
thought. It was created by God out of the primal ether from
which He made the angels, simultaneously with the body and
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
within it. By this union it was qualified to display that moral
activity prescribed for it in the divine teaching, the neglect of
which would defile and tarnish it. According to Saadia some
kind of material substance adheres to the soul as well as to the
angels, and on that account he does not hesitate to accept the
Talmudic expressions about the abode of the soul after death,
or the last judgment which is to take place as soon as the appointed
number of souls shall have made their entrance into
their earthly bodies, when the souls of the righteous will have
their angelic nature recognized, and those of the wicked will
have their lower character revealed. However, Saadia combats
with so much greater fervor the Hindu teaching of
metempsychosis, which had been adopted by Plato and
Pythagoras.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Emunoth</hi>, Ch. VI; Schmiedl, l. c.,
135 f.; Neumark, l. c., I, 536 f.; Husik,
l. c., 376.</note>
</p>

<p>
Bahya connects his theory with the three souls of Plato,
and likewise ascribes to the soul an ethereal essence.<note place='foot'>Neumark,
l. c., 495; Husik, l. c., 108 f.; J. E., art. Bahya.</note> He holds
that its destiny is to raise itself to the order of the angels
through self-purification, and finally to return to God as the
divine Source of light. To this end the intellectual soul, which
has its being from the primal light, must overcome the lower
sensuous soul which leads to sin.
</p>

<p>
6. The conception that the soul is a substance derived from
the luminous primal matter, like the heavenly spheres and the
angels, was now persistently retained by the Jewish thinkers,
who explained thereby its immortality. In adopting the
Aristotelian theory that the soul is the form-principle of the
body, the Platonic doctrine of its preexistence was gradually
relinquished, and its existence ascribed to a creative act of
God at the birth of the child or at its conception. But Jehuda
ha-Levi, the most pious of all the philosophers, emphasized
vigorously the indivisibility of the soul, its incorporeality and
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
its reality apart from the condition of the body, and&mdash;in
opposition to the Aristotelian free-thinkers, who expected the
human soul to be absorbed into the divine soul, the active
intellect,&mdash;he declared the immortality of the individual a
fundamental article of faith.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>,
V, 12. See Cassel, notes; Schmiedl, l. c., 141; Neumark, l. c.,
561; Husik, l. c., 179 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
Now some of the Jewish thinkers, following Jehuda ha Levi,
Ibn Daud, and others, though Aristotelians, shrank from the
logical conclusion of denying all individuality to the soul, and
attributed to it rather a process of purification, which ends with
the elevation of the soul-essence to angelic rank and thus
guarantees its immortality. Not so Maimonides, who accepted
with inexorable earnestness the Aristotelian idea of
form as the perfection of matter. The essence of the human
soul is, for him, that force or potentiality which qualifies it for
the highest development of the intellect, and is alone capable
of grasping the divine. Yet it can acquire a part in the creative
World-spirit only in the same degree as it unfolds this
potentiality to share the divine intellect, whose seat is the
highest sphere of the universe. By dint of this acquired
intelligence it can live on as an independent intellect, in the
image of God, and thus attain beatitude in the contemplation
of Divinity.<note place='foot'>Schmiedl, l. c., 149; Neumark, l.
c., 536 f., 551, 558, 573, 586; Husik,
l. c., 281 f. Comp. Scheyer: <hi rend='italic'>d. Psychol. Syst.
d. Maim.</hi>; Simon, <hi rend='italic'>Aspects of
the Hebrew Genius</hi>, 75-78, 86.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. Naturally the view of Maimonides, that a certain measure
of immortality is granted only to the wise,&mdash;though they must
be morally perfect as well,&mdash;aroused great opposition. Hasdai
Crescas proves its untenableness by asking, <q>Why shall
the wise alone share in immortality? Furthermore, how can
something that came into existence in the course of human
life suddenly acquire eternal duration? Or how can there be
any bliss in the knowledge of God where there is no personality,
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
no self-conscious ego to enjoy it?</q> Therefore Crescas
ascribed to the soul an indestructible spiritual essence
whose perfection is attained, not by mere intellect or knowledge,
but by love of God manifested in a religious and
moral life, and which is thereby made to share in eternal
bliss.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Or Adonai</hi>, II,
6; Joel: <q><hi rend='italic'>Crescas</hi></q>; Husik, l. c., 400.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. All these various thinkers find the future life either expressed
or suggested in the Scriptures as a truth based upon
reason. This is especially the conception of Abraham ibn
Daud, who, contrary to his Aristotelian successor Maimonides,
sees in self-consciousness, by which the soul differentiates itself
from the body as a personality, the proof that it cannot be
subject to dissolution with the body.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Emunah
Ramah</hi>, 39; Husik, l. c., 259 b.</note>
</p>

<p>
Besides the philosophic doctrine of the immortality of the
soul, however, the traditional belief in the resurrection of the
body demanded some consideration on the part of these
philosophers. Saadia defends the latter with all his might,
endeavoring to reconcile the two as best he
can.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Emunoth</hi>, VII.</note> All the rest
leave us in doubt whether resurrection is to be understood
literally or symbolically. Maimonides especially involves
himself in difficulties, inasmuch as in his commentary on the
Mishna he considers the resurrection of the dead an unalterable
article of faith, whereas in his Code<note place='foot'>H.
<hi rend='italic'>Teshubah</hi>, VIII, 2.</note> and in the Moreh
he speaks only of immortality; and again before the end of his
life he wrote, obviously in self-defense, a work which seems
to favor bodily resurrection, yet without clarifying his conceptions
at any time.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Maamar Tehiyyath ha Metim</hi>,
see Schmiedl, l. c., 172.</note> The belief in resurrection had taken
too deep a root in the Jewish consciousness and had been too
firmly established through the liturgy of the Synagogue for any
philosopher to touch it without injuring the very foundations
of faith.
</p>

<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>

<p>
Moreover, beside external caution a certain inner need
seems to have impelled toward the acceptance of resurrection.
As soon as one thinks of the soul as existing or continuing to
live in an incorporeal state, one is involuntarily led toward the
belief in the soul's preëxistence or even in the possibility of
metempsychosis. Thus it seemed more reasonable to believe
in a new formation of the human body together with a new
creation of the world. Therewith came the disposition to
assign to the soul in the future world a body of finer substance,
like that assumed by the mystic
Nahmanides,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Schaar ha Gemul.</hi></note>
in order to
assure to the new humanity a wondrous duration of life like
that of Elijah.
</p>

<p>
9. While the popular philosopher Albo rightly declares that
the nature of the soul is as far beyond all human understanding
as is the nature of God,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ikkarim</hi>,
IV, 35.</note> the mystics sought all the more to
penetrate its secrets. The Cabbalah also divides the soul
into three different substances according to the three Biblical
names, assigning their origins to the three different spheres of
the universe, and reiterating the Platonic theory of the preexistence
of the soul and its future transmigration. This
division into three parts provided scope for all types of theories
concerning the soul in its sensuous, its moral, and its intellectual
nature. Fundamentally the Cabbalah considered the
soul an emanation from the divine intellect with a luminous
character just like the philosophers. But in the Platonic
view of the ascending order of creation, which forms the basis
of the Cabbalah, this mundane life is an abyss of moral degradation,
so that the soul yearns toward the primal Source of
light, finally to find freedom and bliss
with God.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Zohar</hi>, I, 96 b;
<hi rend='italic'>Yalk. Reubeni</hi> to Deut. XIX, 2; J. E., art. Cabala.</note> Thus the
later Cabbalah returned to the teachings of Philo, the Jewish
Plato, for whom death was only the stripping off of the earthly
frame in order to enter the pure and luminous world of God.
</p>

<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>

<p>
10. With Moses Mendelssohn, who in his <hi rend='italic'>Phædon</hi> tried to
translate Plato's proof of immortality into modern terms, a
new attitude toward the nature and destiny of the soul arose
in Judaism among both the philosophers and the educated
laity. Mendelssohn not only endeavored to prove the immortality
of the soul through its indivisibility and incorporeality,
as all the neo-Platonists and Jewish philosophers had done
before him; he also attempted to show from the harmonious
plan which pervades and controls all of God's creation, that
the soul may enter a sphere of existence greater in extent and
content than the little span of earthly life which it relinquishes.
The progress of the soul toward its highest unfolding, unsatisfied
in this life, demands a future growth in the direction of
god-like perfection.<note place='foot'>See Kayserling:
<hi rend='italic'>Moses Mendelssohn</hi>, 148 ff.</note>
At this point the philosopher enters the
province of faith, and thus furnishes for all time the cardinal
point of the belief in immortality. The divine spirit in man,
which is evinced in the self-conscious, morally active personality,
bears within itself the proof and promise of its future life.
Moreover, this corresponds with the belief in God as One who
rules the world for the eternal purposes and aims of perfection,
who cannot deceive the hope of the human heart for a continued
living and striving onward and forward, without thereby impairing
His own perfection. For we all close our lives without
having attained the goal of moral and spiritual perfection
toward which we strive; and therefore our very nature demands
a world where we may reach the higher degree of
perfection for which we long. In this sense we may interpret
the Psalmist's verse: <q>I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with
(beholding) Thy likeness.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XVII, 15.</note>
That is: our spirit, when no
longer bound to the earth, shall behold the divine glory,&mdash;a
vision which transcends our powers of thought.
</p>

<p>
11. In the light of modern investigation, body and soul are
seen to be indissolubly bound together by a reciprocal relation
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
which either benefits or impedes them both. Wherein the
spiritual bond exists that renders both the physical organs
with their muscular and nervous systems and the magnetic
or electric currents which set them in motion subservient to the
will of the intellect; what the mind actually <emph>is</emph>, into whose
deepest recesses science is casting its search-light to illumine
its processes,&mdash;these are problems which will probably remain
ever incapable of solution by human knowledge, and will therefore
always afford new food for the imagination. Yet it is
just in periods like ours, when the belief in God is weakening,
that the human spirit is especially solicitous to guard itself
against the thought of the complete annihilation of its god-like
self-conscious personality. This gives rise to the superstitious
effort to spy out the soul by sensory means and to find ways of
seeing or hearing the spirits of the dead,&mdash;a tendency which
is as dangerous to the spiritual and moral welfare of humanity
as was the ancient practice of necromancy.<note place='foot'>See
J. Jastrow: <hi rend='italic'>Fact and Fable in Psychology.</hi></note> It is therefore
all the more important to base the belief in immortality solely
on the God-likeness of the human soul, which is the mirror of
Divinity. Just as one postulate of faith holds that God, the
Creator of the world, rules in accordance with a moral order,
so another is the immortality of the human soul, which, amidst
yearning and groping, beholds God. The question where, and
how, this self-same ego is to continue, will be left for the power
of the imagination to answer ever anew.
</p>

<p>
12. Certainly it is both comforting and convenient to
imagine the dead who are laid to rest in the earth as being
asleep and to await their reawakening. As the fructifying
rain awakens to a new life the seeds within the soil, so that
they rise from the depths arrayed in new raiment, so, when
touched by the heavenly dew of life, will those who linger in
the grave arise to a new existence, clad in new bodies. This is
the belief which inspired the pious founders of the synagogal
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
liturgy even before the period of the Maccabees, when they
expressed their praise of God's power in that He would send
the fertilizing rain upon the vegetation of the earth, and likewise
in due time the revivifying dew upon the sleeping world
of man. Both appeared to the sages of that age to be evidences
of the same wonder-working power of God. Whoever,
therefore, still sees God's greatness, as they did, revealed
through miracles, that is, through interruptions of the natural
order of life, may cling to the traditional belief in resurrection,
so comforting in ancient times. On the other hand, he who
recognizes the unchangeable will of an all-wise, all-ruling God
in the immutable laws of nature must find it impossible to
praise God according to the traditional formula as the <q>Reviver
of the dead,</q> but will avail himself instead of the expression
used in the Union Prayer Book after the pattern of Einhorn,
<q>He who has implanted within us immortal life.</q><note place='foot'>Singer's
<hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>, 45. The Rabb. Conf. of Philadelphia in 1869 passed the
resolution: <q>The belief in the Resurrection of the Body has no religious foundation
(in Judaism), and the doctrine of Immortality refers to the after-existence
of the Soul only,</q> Comp. D. Philipson: l. c., p. 489 and 492.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLV. Divine Retribution: Reward and Punishment.</head>

<p>
1. The feeling of equity is deeply rooted in human nature,
demanding reparation for every wanton wrong and yielding
recognition to every benevolent act. In fact, upon this
universal principle is based all justice and to a certain extent
all morality. Judaism of every age compresses this demand
of the religious and moral nature of man into the doctrine:
God rewards the good and punishes the evil. This doctrine,
which is the eleventh of Maimonides' articles of faith, constitutes
the underlying presumption of all the Biblical narratives
as well as of the prophetic threats and warnings and those
of the Mosaic law, in so far as earthly success and prosperity
were regarded as the rewards of God and earthly misfortune
and misery as His punishments. In the same degree, however,
as experience contradicted this doctrine, and as examples
multiplied of wicked persons revelling in prosperity and
innocent ones laboring under adversity and woe, it became
necessary to defer the divine retribution more and more to
the future&mdash;at first to a future on earth and later to one in
the world to come, until finally it developed into a pure
spiritual conception in full accord with a higher ethical view
of life.
</p>

<p>
2. As long as in the primitive process of law the family or
the clan was held responsible for the crime of the individual,
ancient Israel also adhered to the idea that <q>God visits the
sins of the fathers upon the third and fourth generation,</q> as
Jeremiah still did<note place='foot'>Jer. XXXII, 18.</note>
in full accord with the second commandment.
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
It was in a far later stage that the rabbis interpreted
the words <q>of those who hate Me</q> in the sense of individual
responsibility.<note place='foot'>Targ. to Ex. XX, 5;
Sanh. 27 b.</note> Only in accordance with the Deuteronomic
law which says: <q>The fathers shall not be put to death for
the children, neither shall the children be put to death for the
fathers; every man shall be put to death for his own
sin,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XXIV, 16.</note>
did the religious consciousness rebel against the thought that
a later generation should suffer for the sins of its ancestors,
and hence the popular adage arose, <q>The fathers have eaten
sour grapes, and the teeth of the children are set on
edge.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. XVIII, 2.</note>
It is the prophet Ezekiel who refutes once and for all the idea of
a guilt transmitted to children and consequently of hereditary
sin and punishment, insisting on the doctrine that personal
responsibility alone determines divine retribution.<note place='foot'>Ezek.
XVIII, 20.</note> But here
a new element affects divine retribution. God's long-suffering
and mercy do not desire the immediate punishment, the death
of the sinner. He should be given time to return to a better
mode of life.<note place='foot'>XVIII, 23, 32.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the great enigma of human destiny, which vexes the
author of the seventy-third Psalm and that of the book of
Job, still presses for a better solution. It is true that the popular
belief and popular legends which are preserved in post-Biblical
writings as well, insisted on a justice which requites
<q>measure for measure.</q><note place='foot'>Ex. XVIII, 11;
XXI, 23-25; Sota I, 7-9; Tos. Sota III-IV; Sanh.
90 a; B. Wisdom XVI-XIX; Jubilees IV, 31; II Macc. V,
10; XV, 32.</note> Still insight into actual life does
not confirm the teaching of the popular philosophy that the
<q>righteous will be requited in the earth</q> and that <q>evil
pursueth sinners.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. XI, 31;
XIII, 21.</note> The unshakeable belief in the justice of
God had to find another solution for life's antinomies, and
was forced to reach out for another world in which the divine
righteousness would find its complete realization.
</p>

<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>

<p>
3. Biblical Judaism with few exceptions recognized only the
present world and the subterranean world of shadows, a view
preserved in its essentials by Ben Sira and the Sadducees,
who were subsequently declared heretics. In contrast to
them Pharisaic or Rabbinic Judaism teaches a resurrection
after death for a life of eternal bliss or eternal torment, according
as the divine judgment finds one righteous and another
wicked. We may leave aside the consideration that the first
impulse toward a Jewish belief in resurrection came from the
non-fulfillment of the national hope, wherefore it was always
bound up with the soil of the Holy Land, as will be seen in
Chapter LIV. The fact remains that the divine judgment to
follow upon resurrection was consistently regarded as a great
world-judgment, which was to decide the future lot of all
men and spirits. It must be noted also that the apocalyptic
and midrashic literature often identifies the pious with the
God-fearing Israelites as those who shall arise to eternal life,
while the wicked are identified with the idolatrous heathen,
who are condemned to eternal death, or, as it is frequently
expressed, to a second death.<note place='foot'>See
especially Sanh. 90 b-92 b, ref. to Ex. VI, 4; Deut. XI, 9; IV,
5; XXXI, 16; Isa. XXVI, 19; Dan. XII, 13; Ps. LXXII, 16; also Ex. XV,
1; Josh. VIII, 30; and Song of Songs, VII, 10. On the Second Death see
<hi rend='italic'>Targ.</hi> to Deut. XXXIII, 6; Isa. XIV,
19; LXV, 6; Jer. LI, 39; and Revelation
XX, 6, 14; XXI, 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. Exactly as the old Persian Mazdaism expected the
resurrection of all, both good and bad, the believers in Ahura
Mazda as well as the rest of humanity, so the apocalyptic
writers prior to the Talmudic period describe resurrection as
universal: <q>In those days the earth will give back those who
have been entrusted to her, and the nether-world will release
that which it has received,</q> according to Enoch LI, 1. Similarly
fourth Esdras remarks: <q>And after seven days of silence
for all creatures, the new order of the world shall be raised up,
and mortality itself shall perish; and the earth shall restore
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
those that are asleep in her; and so shall the dust give back
those that dwell in silence; and the chambers shall deliver
those souls that were committed unto them. The Most High
shall appear on the throne of judgment, and shall say: Judgment
only shall remain, truth shall stand, and faith shall wax
strong. The good deeds shall be of force, and wicked deeds
shall no longer sleep. The lake of torment shall be revealed,
and opposite to it the place of joy; the furnace of Gehinnom
will be visible, and opposite to it the bliss of Paradise. Then
the Most High will speak to the heathen nations, who have
awakened: behold now Him whom ye have denied, whom ye
have not served, whose command ye have abhorred. Gaze
now here and there,&mdash;here bliss and rest, there fire and
torment.</q><note place='foot'>IV Ezra VII, 31 f.; comp.
Baruch Apoc. 42 ff.; Adam et Eva, 42; II
Sibyll., 220-236; IV Sibyll., 180 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
The rabbinic form of the doctrine of resurrection is quite
unambiguous: <q>Those born into the world are destined to
die; the dead, to live again; and those who enter the world
to come, to be judged.</q><note place='foot'>Aboth
IV, 22.</note> And wherever the rabbinic or
apocalyptic literature mentions the share of the pious, or of
Israel, in eternal life, this implies that, while these enter the
world to come, the evil-doers or idolaters shall enter hell for
eternal death; the understanding being that there is a universal
resurrection for the world-judgment.
</p>

<p>
5. The whole system of eschatology in connection with
resurrection arose undoubtedly from the Persian doctrine,
according to which death together with all that is evil and
unclean is created by Ahriman, the evil principle, and will
suffer annihilation with him, as soon as the good principle,
Ahura Mazda, has achieved the final victory. Then Soshiosh
<q>the Savior,</q> the descendant of Zoroaster, will begin his
kingdom of eternal life for the righteous, coincident with the
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
awakening of the dead.<note place='foot'>See Stave, <hi rend='italic'>Ueb.
d. Einfluss d. Parsismus a. d.</hi> Judenth., 145 ff.; Boecklen:
<hi rend='italic'>D. Verwandtschaft d. jued, christl. u. d.</hi>
pars. <hi rend='italic'>Eschatologie</hi>; Schorr: <hi rend='italic'>He Haluz</hi>,
VII-VIII.</note> Pharisaic Judaism, however, gave
the hope of resurrection a deeper moral and religious meaning.
The proofs, or rather analogies from nature, of the seeds
springing from the earth in a new form, of men awakening
from sleep in the morning, or of the original creation, are
shared by the rabbis and the New Testament writers with the
Persians. On the other hand, proofs based on the prophetic
hope for the future are purely national. So also are those
proofs based on the Biblical passage that the God of the fathers
had sworn to the Patriarchs to give them the Promised
Land.<note place='foot'>Sanb. 91 a, b; Matt. XXII, 31 f.</note>
Likewise the reference to the wondrous resurrections related
in the history of Elijah and Elisha offers no proof of a universal
resurrection. A striking point and one which deepens
the idea of retribution is the simile of the Lame and the
Blind<note place='foot'>The parable is found in an Apocryphon ascribed to the prophet
Ezekiel, see Epiphanius Haeres, LXIV, ed. Dindorf, II, 683 f. and ascribed to R.
Ishmael, Lev. R. IV, 5; in Sanh. 91 a, b it is given in a dialogue with Antonius;
in Tanh. Wayithro, ed. Buber, § 12, it is anonymous.</note>
employed by Jehuda ha Nasi in a dialogue with the Emperor
Antoninus. The latter had said that at the last judgment
both soul and body might deny all guilt. The body may
say: <q>The soul alone has sinned, for since it has parted from
me, I have lain motionless as a stone.</q> And the soul, on its
part, may reply: <q>It must be the body that sinned, for
since I have parted from it I soar about in the air free as a
bird.</q> To this Jehuda ha Nasi answered: <q>A king once
possessed a garden with splendid fig-trees, and appointed as
watchmen in it a blind man and a lame man. Then the lame
man spoke to the blind man, <q>I see fine figs up there; take
me upon your shoulders, and I shall pick them, and we can
enjoy them together.</q> They did so, and when the king
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
entered the garden, the figs were gone. But when they were
held to account for it, the lame man said, <q>How could I have
taken them, since I cannot walk?</q> And the blind man said,
<q>And I cannot see.</q> Then the king had the lame man placed
upon the shoulders of the blind man and judged them both
together. In like manner will God treat the body and the
soul, as it is said:<note place='foot'>Ps. L, 4.</note>
<q>He calleth to the heavens above&mdash;that
is, the heavenly element, the soul&mdash;and to the earth beneath&mdash;the
earthly body&mdash;and places them together before His
throne of judgment.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
6. It cannot be denied that the idea that the soul and body,
having committed good or evil deeds together in this life,
should receive in common their reward or punishment in the
world to come, satisfied the Jewish sense of justice better
than the conception developed by Hellenistic Judaism (after
the Platonic and, in the last resort, the Egyptian view) that the
soul alone should partake of eternal bliss or torment. Nevertheless
the philosophically trained Jewish thinkers of Alexandria
could not bring themselves to accept a bodily resurrection,
and therefore emphasized so much more strongly the great
day of judgment and the reward and punishment of the soul
in the world to come. Still we find much inconsistency among
various authors, sometimes even in the same work, in the
conception of future bliss for the good and torture for the
wicked. These varied according to the more sensuous or
more spiritual view taken of the soul and the celestial world,
and according to the literal or figurative interpretation of the
Biblical allusions to <q>fire,</q> <q>worms,</q> and the like in the punishment
of evil-doers, and of the delights awaiting the righteous
in the future.<note place='foot'>Isa. LXVI, 24; see Yalkut;
Bousset, 308-321; J. E., art. Eschatology.</note>
</p>

<p>
On this point free play was allowed to the imagination of the
people and the fancy of the Haggadists. Still, throughout, the
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
solemn thought found its echo that mortal man must give
account to the inexorable Judge of the living and the dead for
the life just completed, in order to be ushered, according to his
deserts, into the portals of the celestial Paradise or of
hell.<note place='foot'>Aboth III, 1, 19, 20; Ber. 28 b.</note>
This led to the view that this whole mundane life is but like a
wayfarers' inn for the life to come, or the vestibule of the
palace (more precisely the <q>banquet-hall</q>) of the
future.<note place='foot'>Aboth IV, 21.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. A further development of the principle of justice in
application to future retribution led not merely to such a depiction
of the tortures of hell and the delights of heaven that
the maxim: <q>measure for measure,</q> so often deviated from
in this life, could find complete realization in the world to
come. An intermediate stage also was devised for those
whose merit or guilt would enroll them neither among the
righteous for eternal bliss, nor among the wicked for eternal
punishment. While the stern teachers of the school of Shammai
insisted that these mediocre ones must undergo a twelve-month
process of purification in the fires of Gehenna, the
milder school of Hillel maintained that the divine mercy
would grant them admission into Paradise even without the
fires of purgatory<note place='foot'>Tos. Sanh. XIII, 3;
R. H. 16 b; see J. E., art. Purgatory.</note>, either
through the merit of the patriarchs<note place='foot'>See Testament
of Abraham XIV; comp. Kohler in J. Q. R. VII, 587.</note>
or owing to the deserts of a son who has been trained to reverence
for God, as is indicated by the legend concerning the
Kaddish prayer.<note place='foot'>T. d. b. El. Zuta XVII,
ed. Friedman, p. 23. See note, Kalla R. II.,
J. E., art. Kaddish, but comp. IV Ezra VII,
102-115.</note> In any case, the teaching of Hillel concerning
the all-sufficing mercy of God swept aside the old hopeless
conception that eternal suffering in hell awaits the average
man, which was adhered to by the Christian church in connection
with its dogma of the atoning blood of Christ. Likewise,
in the dispute of schools as to whether or not the bliss of eternal
life would be accorded also to the righteous among the heathen,
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
the more humane view of Joshua ben Hananiah prevailed over
the gloomier one of the Shammaite Eliezer ben Hyrcanos, and
therefore the doctrine became generally accepted, <q>The
righteous of all nations shall have a share in the world to
come.</q><note place='foot'>Tos. Sanh. XIII, 2; Sanh. 105 a; Midr. Teh. Ps. IX, 18:
<q>The wicked shall return to Sheol, all the nations that forget God,</q>
R. Joshua taking the last
sense as restrictive and R. Eliezer as a generalization.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. The apocalyptic writers, who largely influenced the New
Testament, and also the Haggadists refer with fond interest
to the banquet of the pious in the world to come, where they
would be served with heavenly manna as bread, with wine
preserved from the days of the creation, and with the flesh
of the Leviathan or the fruit of the Tree of Life.<note place='foot'>For
the banquet of the pious see Aboth. III, 16; Shab. 153 a; Pes. R. XLI;
comp. Luke XIII, 28; XXII, 30, and parallels. The idea rests on Isa. LXV,
13, which is taken literally, and Ps. XXIII, 5; see Midr. Teh., ad loc. For the
Leviathan and Behemoth see Job XL, 15-30; B. B. 74 b-75 a; Enoch LX,
7 f.; IV Ezra VI, 52; Baruch Apoc. XXIX, 4; Targ. Ps. CIV, 26; Lev. R.
XIII, 3. For the giant bird Ziz see Ps. L, 40-41; Targ. and Midr. Teh., ad loc.;
Tanh. Beshallah, ed. Buber, 24; Jellinek, B. H. III, 76, 80. For the heavenly
manna Ps. LXXVIII, 24; Joma 75 b; Hag. 12 b; Tanh. Beshallah, ed. Buber,
21; Sibyll. Prœmium 87; II, 318; III, 746; IV Ezra IX, 19. For the wine
see Ex. R. XXV, 10; Ber. 34 b; Sanh. 99 a; Matt. XXVI, 29; comp. also
Num. R. XIII, 3 for other fruits of Paradise. For the Persian origin of these
ideas see <hi rend='italic'>Bundahish</hi>, XIX, 13; XXX, 25. The Behemoth
corresponds with the
primeval ox Hadhayos, whose flesh produces the sap of immortality; the giant
fish and bird with <hi rend='italic'>Bundahish</hi>, XVIII, 5-8; XIX, 16-19; the wine
corresponds with the Parsee Hom: <hi rend='italic'>Bundahish</hi>, XXX, 25. See
Windishman: <hi rend='italic'>Zoroastr. Stud.</hi>,
92 f., 252 f., and Boeklen, l. c., p. 68.</note> On the
other hand they elaborated the tortures of the evil-doers in
hell which are to afford a pleasing sight to the pious in heaven,
just as the torments of the sinners are aggravated by the sight
of the righteous enjoying all delights.<note place='foot'>Shab.
153 a, with ref. to Isa. LXV, 13-14; LXVI, 24; IV Ezra VII, 83, 93.</note> But at the
same time we meet with a more refined and spiritual conception of future
reward and punishment among the disciples of R. Jehuda ha
Nasi, in the Babylonian Rab, and the Palestinian R. Johanan
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
and his pupil Simeon ben Lakish. <q>In the future world,</q>
says Rab, <q>there are no sensual enjoyments nor passions, but
the righteous sit at the table of God with wreaths upon their
heads (like the Greek sages at a symposium!), feeding on the
radiance of the divine majesty, as did the chosen ones of Israel
on the heights of Sinai.</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 17 a.</note> R. Johanan teaches,
<q>All the promises held forth in Scripture in definite form as reward for
the future, refer to the Messianic era, whereas in regard to the
bliss awaiting the pious in the world to come, the words of Isaiah
hold good: <q>No eye hath seen it, O God, beside Thee.</q></q><note place='foot'>Ber.
34 b; with ref. to Isa., LXIV, 3.</note>
Simeon ben Lakish even went so far as to say, <q>There is
neither hell nor paradise. Instead, God sends out the sun
in its full strength from its encasement, and the wicked are
consumed by its heat, while the pious find delight and healing
in its beams.</q><note place='foot'>Ab. Zar. 36 with ref. to Mal. III, 19-22.</note>
</p>

<p>
However, the popular imagination demanded more perceptible
pictures of heaven and hell, if fear of punishment was
to deter men from sin, and hope of reward to lead them to
virtue. The description of the modes of reward and punishment
for the future in the Koran is the outcome of mingled
Persian and Jewish popular conceptions, and its crass sensuousness
exerted in turn a decisive influence upon the entire Gaonic
period,<note place='foot'>See Jellinek, B. H. I, II and
III, the Treatise on <hi rend='italic'>Gehinnom</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Gan
Eden</hi>.</note> leaving its mark upon even so clear a thinker as Saadia.
Not only does he admit into his philosophic work all the
crude and conflicting descriptions of the future world, but he
also argues for the eternity of the punishments of hell and of the
delights of heaven as logical necessities, because only such
could sufficiently deter or allure mankind, and a righteous
God must certainly carry out His threats and
promises.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Emunoth</hi> VII, IX, and
comp. J. Guttman; <hi rend='italic'>Religionsphil. des Saadia</hi>, 208
f., 249 f.</note>
</p>

<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>

<p>
9. The entire Jewish philosophy or theology of the Middle
Ages remained under the influence of the traditional belief in
resurrection. Even Maimonides, whose purely spiritual conception
of the soul and of salvation is utterly irreconcilable
with the belief in bodily resurrection, and who accordingly
dwells instead, in both his Moreh and his Code, on the future
world of spirits, with explicit emphasis on their incorporeality,
did not have the courage to break altogether with the traditional
belief in resurrection. In his apologetic treatise on resurrection
he even attempts to present it as a miraculous act
of God beyond the grasp of the intellect. He omits, however,
to specify what purpose this miracle may serve, since in the
Maimonidean system reward and punishment would be administered
in the world of spirits in a much purer and more
satisfactory manner.<note place='foot'>See Joel, <hi rend='italic'>Religionsphil.
d. Mose b. Maimon</hi>., p. 40.</note> The same standpoint is taken also by
Jehuda ha Levi as well as by Crescas and
Albo.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>, I, 15; V, 14;
<hi rend='italic'>Or Adonai</hi> III, 4, 2. See Joel: <hi rend='italic'>Crescas</hi>,
p. 74 f.; Albo: <hi rend='italic'>Ikkarim</hi>, IV, 29-41.</note> If then
resurrection be a miracle, it falls outside the scope of philosophic
speculation and becomes a matter of faith; accordingly
the mystics from Nahmanides down to Manasseh ben Israel
associated with it the grossest conceptions.<note place='foot'>Nahmanides,
l. c., last chapter; Manasse b. Israel in <hi rend='italic'>Nishmat Chayim</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
10. The actual view of Maimonides concerning future
retribution is expressed clearly and unambiguously in both
his early product, the commentary on the Mishna, and in the
ripest fruit of his life work, the Mishneh Torah, where he says
<q>Not immortality, but the power to win eternal life through
the knowledge and the love of God is implanted in the human
soul. If it has the ability to free itself from the bondage of
the senses and by means of the knowledge of God to lift itself
to the highest morality and the purest thinking, then it has
attained divine bliss, true immortality, and it enters the realm
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
of the eternal Spirit together with the angels. If it sinks into
the sensuousness of earthly existence, then it is cut off from
eternal life; it suffers annihilation like the beast. In reality
this life eternal is not the future, but is already potentially
present and invariably at hand in the spirit of man himself,
with its constant striving toward the highest. When the
rabbis speak of paradise and hell, describing vividly the delights
of the one and the torments of the other, these are only
metaphors for the agony of sin and the happiness of virtue.
True piety serves God neither from fear of punishment nor
from desire for reward, as servants obey their master, but
from pure love of God and truth. Thus the saying of Ben
Azai is verified, <q>The reward of a good deed is the good deed
itself.</q><note place='foot'>Aboth. IV, 2.</note>
Only children need bribes and threats to be trained
to morality. Thus religion trains mankind. The people who
cannot penetrate into the kernel need the shell, the external
means of threats and promises.</q><note place='foot'>Com. to
Sanh. XI and <hi rend='italic'>H. Teshubah</hi>, VIII.</note> These splendid words of
the great thinker require supplementing or modification in
only one direction, and that has been afforded by the keenest
critic among Jewish philosophers, Hasdai Crescas. Too
deeply enmeshed in the Aristotelian system, Maimonides
found the happiness and immortality of man solely in the acquired
intellectual power which becomes part of the divine
intellect, and the mere knowledge of God is to him tantamount
to the blissful enjoyment of the pious in the radiance of
God's majesty. Consequently those who strive and soar
heavenward through their moral conduct and noble aspirations,
without at the same time being thinkers, receive no reward.
Against this Aristotelian one-sidedness Crescas emphasizes
God's love and goodness for which the righteous yearn, and in
whose pursuit man finds perfection and happiness. Not for
the sake of attaining bliss shall we love God and practice
virtue and truth, but to love God and practice virtue is itself
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
true bliss. This is the nearness of God referred to by the
Psalmist and declared to be man's highest
good.<note place='foot'>Ps. LXXIII, 28.</note> There is
no need of any other reward than this, and there is no greater
punishment than to be deprived of this boon
forever.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Or Adonai</hi>, II,
55; VI, 1; comp. Joel, l. c., 56-62; comp. Bahya: <hi rend='italic'>Hoboth,
Halebaboth, Shaar Bitahon</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
11. In the face of these two great thinkers, to whom Spinoza
owes the fundamental ideas of his ethics,<note place='foot'>See Joel:
<hi rend='italic'>Z. Gen. d. Lehre Spinoza</hi>, p. 64.</note> the question considered
by Albo, whether the eternal duration of the tortures of
hell is reconcilable with the divine
mercy,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ikkarim</hi>, IV,
35-38.</note> a question which still
plays an important rôle in Christian theology, and which was
probably suggested to Albo through his disputations with representatives
of the Church,&mdash;is for us superfluous and superseded.
Our modern conceptions of time and space admit
neither a place or a world-period for the reward and punishment
of souls, nor the intolerable conception of eternal joy
without useful action and eternal agony without any moral
purpose. Modern man knows that he bears heaven and
hell within his own bosom. Indeed, so much more difficult is
the life of duty which knows of no other reward than happiness
through harmony with God, the Father of the immortal
soul, and of no other punishment than the soul's distress at its
inner discord with the primal Source and the divine Ideal of all
morality. All the more powerfully is modern man controlled
by the thought that the universe permits no stagnation, no
barren enjoyment or barren suffering, but that every death
marks the transition to a higher goal for greater accomplishment.
This yearning of the soul finds expression in the Talmudic
maxim, <q>The righteous find rest neither in this world,
nor in the world to come, as it is said, <q>They go from strength
to strength, until they appear before God on Zion.</q></q><note place='foot'>Ber.
64 a, with ref. to Ps. LXXXIV, 8; see also Midr. Teh. ad loc.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLVI. The Individual and the Race</head>

<p>
1. In every system of belief the object of divine care and
guidance is the individual. His soul and his conscience raise
him up, especially according to the Jewish doctrine, to the
divine image, to Godchildship. His freedom and moral
responsibility are the patent of nobility for his divine nature;
his ego, controlling external forces and carrying out its own
designs, vouches for his immortality. Nevertheless the spirit
of the Biblical language indicates rightly that the individual is only
a son of man,&mdash;<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ben adam</foreign>,&mdash;that is,
a segment or member of the human race, but not the perfect typical exemplification
of the whole of mankind. From the social
organism he receives what he is, what he has, and what he
ought to do, both his nature and his destiny; and only in
association with the community and under the guidance of
the highest ideal of humanity can he attain true perfection.
Only mankind as a whole, in its coöperation, as it extends over
the vast expanse of the earth, and in its succession which
reaches through the centuries of the world's history, can bring
to full development the divine image in man, his moral and
religious nature with all its varied potentialities. It is man
collectively who in the first chapter of Genesis receives the
command to subject the earth with all its creatures to his
cultural purposes.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Adam, and
Jellinek: <hi rend='italic'>Bezelem Elohim</hi>, Sermon IV. The term
<emph>humanity</emph> arose among the Stoics. See Reizenstein:
<hi rend='italic'>Wesen u. Werden d.
Humanität</hi>; comp. Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Ethik d.
Griechen</hi>, II, 324, 477; and Zeller, <hi rend='italic'>Griech.
Philo.</hi> III, 1, 287, 299. For the rabbinical
<hi rend='italic'>Berioth</hi> for humanity see B. Sira,
XVI, 16.</note> In whatever stage of culture we meet
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
man, his modes of thought and speech, his customs and moral
views, even his spiritual faculties are the result of a long historic
process of development, the product of an extremely
complicated past, as well as the basis of a future which expands
in all directions. The ancients expressed this in their
suggestive way, remarking in connection with the verse of the
Psalm, <q>Thine eyes did see mine unformed substance, and in
Thy book they were all written,</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
CXXXIX, 16.</note> that at the creation of the
first man God recorded the succession of races with their sages,
seers and leaders until the end of time.<note place='foot'>Midr.
Teh., ad loc.; Pesik. R. XXIII; Gen. R. XXIV, 2; Sanh. 38 b after
<hi rend='italic'>Seder Olam</hi> at the close.</note> And when the
Haggadists say that in creating man God took dust from every
part of the world, so that he would be everywhere at
home,<note place='foot'>Gen. R. VIII, 1.</note>
again they were thinking of mankind. Similarly in the passage
from the Psalms, <q>Thou hast hemmed me in behind and
before,</q> they explain that God made the first man with two
faces, one looking forward and the other backward, that is,
with a Janus head; and thus they regard man in his relation
to the past and the future, in his historic
continuity.<note place='foot'>Eodem; Midr. Teh. to Ps. CXXXIX, 5; Ber. 61 a.</note>
As both physically and spiritually he is the heir of innumerable ancestors
who have transmitted to him with their blood all
their idiosyncrasies and capacities in a peculiar combination,
so will he transmit both consciously and unconsciously the
inherited possessions of mankind to future generations for
continued growth or for degeneration. He forms but a link
in the great chain of history, whose goal is the perfected ideal
of humanity, the completed idea of man. This was the underlying
thought of Ben Azzai in his dispute with R. Akiba, who
held that the principal maxim of Jewish teaching is <q>Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.</q> In opposition to this
Ben Azzai presented as the most important lesson of the Bible
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
the verse which says, <q>This is the book of the generations of
man; in the day that God created man, in the likeness of
God made He him.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. R. XXIV, 8.</note>
The godlikeness of man develops more
and more through the evolution of the human race. This is
the basic force for all human love and all human worth.
</p>

<p>
2. This social bond existing between the individual and the
race imposes upon him in accordance with his occupation
certain duties in the same degree as it confers benefits. Ben
Zoma, a colleague of Ben Azzai, expressed this as follows:
When he saw great crowds of people together, he exclaimed,
<q>Praised be Thou who hast created all these to serve me.</q>
In explanation of this blessing he said, <q>How hard the first
man in his loneliness must have toiled, until he could eat a
morsel of bread or wear a garment, but I find everything prepared.
The various workmen, from the farmer to the miller
and the baker, from the weaver to the tailor, all labor for me.
Can I then be ungrateful and be oblivious of my duty?</q><note place='foot'>Tos.
Ber. VII, 2; Ber. 58 a.</note>
In the same sense he interprets the last verse in Koheleth,
<q>This is the end of the matter; fear God and keep His commandments,
for this is the whole duty of man.</q> That is to say,
all mankind toils for him who does so. Thus does human life
rest upon a reciprocal relation, upon mutual duty.<note place='foot'>Ber. 6 b;
Shab. 30 b; see Rashi (against Bacher: <hi rend='italic'>Ag. Tann.</hi>, I, 432).</note>
</p>

<p>
3. Man is a social being who must strike root in many
spheres of life in order that the variegated blossoms and fruits
of his spiritual and emotional nature may sprout forth. The
more richly the communal life is specialized into professions
and occupations, the more does the province of the individual
expand, and the more difficult it is for him to attain perfection
on all sides. According to his faculties and predisposition
he must always develop one or the other side of human endeavor
and pursue now the beautiful, now the good, now the
true and now the useful, if as the image of God he is to emulate
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
the Ideal of all existence, the Pattern of all creation. Consequently
he may reflect some radiance of the divine glory in
his character and achievements, whether as moral hero, as
sage and thinker, as statesman and battler for freedom, as
artist, or as the discoverer of new forces and new worlds; and
yet the full splendor of God's greatness is mirrored only by
mankind as a whole through its ceaseless common action and
interaction. Therefore Judaism deprecates every attempt to
present a single individual, be he ever so noble or wise, as the
ideal of all human perfection, as a perfect man, free from fault
or blemish. <q>There is none holy as the Lord, for there is none
beside Thee,</q> says Scripture.<note place='foot'>I Sam.
II, 2.</note> Instead of extolling any single
mortal as the type or ideal of perfection, our sages rather say
with reference to the lofty characters of the Bible: <q>There is
no generation which cannot show a man with the love for
righteousness of an Abraham, or the nobility of spirit of a
Moses, or the love for truth of a Samuel.</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
R. LVI, 9.</note> That is to say,
every age creates its own heroes, who reflect the majesty of
God in their own way.
</p>

<p>
4. As man is the keystone of all creation, so he is called upon
to take his full share in the progress of the race. <q>He who
formed the earth created it not a waste; He formed it to be
inhabited,</q> says the prophet.<note place='foot'>Isa. LXV,
18; see Yeb. 62 a.</note> True humanity has its seat,
not in the life of the recluse, but in the family circle, amid
mutual love and loyalty between husband and wife, between
parents and children. The sages, with their keen insight into
the spirit of the Scripture, point to the fact that it is man and
wife together who first receive the name of <q>man,</q> because
only the mutual helpfulness and influence, the care and toil
for one another draw forth the treasures of the soul, and create
relations which warrant permanency and give promise of a
future.<note place='foot'>Gen. R. XVII, 2.</note>
</p>

<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>

<p>
5. Still the family circle itself is only a segment of the
nation, which creates speech and custom, and assigns to each
person his share in the common activity of the various classes
of men. Only within the social bond of the nation or tribe is
the interdependence of all brought home to the consciousness
of the individual, together with all the common moral obligations
and religious yearnings. Through the few elect ones of
the nation or tribe, God's voice is heard as to what is right
in both custom and law, and through them the individual is
roused to a sense of duty. It is society which enables the
human mind to triumph over physical necessity by ever new
discoveries of tools and means of life, thus to attain freedom
and prosperity, and, through meditation over the continually
expanding realm of God's world, to build up the various systems
of science and of art.
</p>

<p>
6. But the single nation also is too dependent upon the
conditions of its historic past, of its land and its racial characteristics,
to bring the divine image to its full development in a
perfect man. Humanity as a whole comes to its own, to true
self-consciousness, only through the reciprocal contact of
race with race, through the coöperation of the various circles
and classes of life which extend beyond the narrow limits of
nationality and have in view common interests and aims,
whether in the pursuit of truth, in the achievement of good,
or in the creation of the useful and the beautiful. Only
when the various nations and groups of men learn to regard
themselves as members of one great family, will the life of the
individual find its true value in relation to the idea and the
ideal of humanity. Then only will the unity and harmony
of the entire cosmic life find its reflection in the blending of the
factors and forces of human society.
</p>

<p>
7. Judaism has evolved the idea of the unity of mankind
as a corollary of its ethical monotheism. Therefore the Bible
begins the history of the world with the creation of Adam and
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
Eve, the one human pair. The covenant which God concluded
after the flood with Noah, the father of the new mankind,
has its corresponding goal at the end of time in the divine
covenant which is to include all tribes of men in one great
brotherhood; and so also the dispersion of man through the
confusion of tongues at the building of the Tower of Babel has
its counterpart in the rallying of all nations at the end of time
for the worship of the One and Only God in a pure tongue
and a united spirit on Zion's heights.<note place='foot'>For the term
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Aguddah Ahath</foreign>
in the New Year and Atonement Day Prayer,
Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerbook</hi>, p. 239, comp. Gen. R.
LXXXVIII, 6, and XXXIX, 3.</note> Whatever the civilizations
of Greece and Rome and the Stoic philosophy have
achieved for the idea of humanity, Judaism has offered in its
prophetic hope for a Messianic future the guiding idea for the
progress of man in history, thus giving him the impulse to
ceaseless efforts toward the highest of all aims for the realization
of which all nations and classes, all systems of faith and
thought, must labor together for millenniums to come.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLVII. The Moral Elements of Civilization</head>

<p>
1. Because Judaism sees the attainment of human perfection
only when the divine in man has reached complete development
through the unimpeded activity of all his spiritual,
moral, and social forces, it insists upon the full recognition of
all branches of human society as instruments of man's elevation,
either individually or collectively. It deprecates the
idea that any force or faculty of human life be regarded as
unholy and therefore be suppressed. It thus rejects on principle
monastic renunciation and isolation, pointing to the
Scriptural verse, <q>He who formed the earth created it not
a waste; He formed it to be inhabited.<note place='foot'>Isa. XLV, 18.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
2. Accordingly Judaism regards the establishment of
family life through marriage as a duty obligatory on mankind,
and sees in the entrance into the marital relation an act
of life's supreme consecration. In contrast to the celibacy
sanctioned by the Church and approved by the rabbis only
under certain conditions, and exceptionally for their holy
exercises by the Essenes, the Tannaite R. Eliezer pronounces
the man who through bachelorhood shirks the duty of rearing
children to be guilty of murder against the human race.
Another calls him a despoiler of the divine image. Another
rabbi says that such a one renounces his privilege of true
humanity, in so far as only in the married state can happiness,
blessing, and peace be attained.<note place='foot'>Yeb.
62 a, b</note> It is significant as to the
spirit of Judaism that, while other religions regard the celibacy
of the priests and saints as signs of highest sanctity, the
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
Jewish law expressly commands that the high priest shall not
be allowed to observe the solemn rites of the Day of Atonement
if unmarried.<note place='foot'>Yoma I, 1.</note>
Love for the wife, the keeper and guardian
of the home, must attune his heart to tenderness and
sympathy, if he is to plead for the people before the Holy God.
He can make intercession for the household of Israel only if
he himself has founded a family, in which are practiced faithfulness
and modesty, love and regard for the life-companion,
all the domestic virtues inherited from the past.
</p>

<p>
3. Another moral factor for human development is industry,
which secures to the individual his independence and his
dignity when he engages in creative labor after the divine
pattern, and which rewards him with comfort and the joy of
life. This also is so highly valued by Judaism that industrial
activity, which unlocks from the earth ever new treasures to
enrich human life, is enjoined upon all, even those pursuing
more spiritual vocations. <q>Seest thou a man diligent in his
business? He shall stand before kings.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. XXII, 29.</note>
<q>When thou eatest the labor of thy hands, happy art thou and it shall be
well with thee.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. CXXVIII,
2.</note> In commenting on this last verse, the sages
say: <q>This means that thou wilt be doubly blessed; happy
art thou in this world, and it shall be well with thee in the
world to come.</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 8 a.</note> Again they say, <q>No labor, however
humble, is dishonoring,</q><note place='foot'>Ned. 49
b.</note> also: <q>Idleness, even amid great
wealth, leads to the wasting of the intellect.</q><note place='foot'>Keth.
V, 5, 59 b.</note> Moreover it is
said, <q>Whoever neglects to train his son to a trade, rears him
to become a robber.</q><note place='foot'>Kid. 29 a;
comp. R. Simeon b. Yohai, Mek. Beshallah, 56.</note> True, there were some among the
pious who themselves abstained from participation in industry,
and therefore proclaimed, in the same tenor as the Sermon
on the Mount, <q>Behold the beasts of the field and the birds of
heaven, they sow not and reap not, and their heavenly Father
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
cares for them.</q><note place='foot'>Kid. 82 a.</note> But these formed an exception,
while the majority of Jewish teachers extolled the real blessing of labor
and its efficacy in ennobling heart and spirit.<note place='foot'>Abot. I, 10;
II, 2; B. B. 11 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. Neither does Judaism begrudge man the joy of life
which is the fruit of industry, nor rob it of its moral value.
On the contrary, that ascetic spirit which encourages self-mortification
and rigid renunciation of all pleasure is declared
sinful.<note place='foot'>Taan. 11 a.</note> Instead, we are told that in the world to
come man shall have to give account for every enjoyment offered him in
this life, whether he used it gratefully or rejected it
in ingratitude.<note place='foot'>Yer. Kid. IV at the close.</note>
Abstinence is declared to be praiseworthy only in
curbing wild desires and passions. For the rest, true piety lies
in the consecration of every gift of God, every pleasure of life
which He has offered, and using it in His service, so that the
seal of holiness shall be imprinted even upon the satisfaction
of the most sensuous desires.
</p>

<p>
5. Judaism, then, lays special emphasis upon sociability as
advancing all that is good and noble in man. The life of the
recluse, according to its teaching, is of little use to the world
at large and hence of no moral value. Only in association
with one's fellow-men does life find incentive and opportunity
for worthy work. <q>Either a life among friends or death</q>
is a Talmudic proverb.<note place='foot'>Taan. 23 a.</note> Unselfish friendship like
that of David and Jonathan is lauded and pointed out
for imitation.<note place='foot'>Abot. V, 19.</note>
Through it man learns to step beyond the narrow boundaries
of his ego, and in caring for others he will purify and exalt his
own soul, until at last its love will include all mankind.
</p>

<p>
6. <q>Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance
of his friend,</q> says the book of Proverbs,<note place='foot'>Prov. XXVII, 17.</note>
and the sages derive from this verse the doctrine that learning does
not thrive in solitude.<note place='foot'>Taan. 7 a.</note> A single log does not
nourish the
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
flame; to keep up the fire one must throw in one piece of
wood after the other. This applies also to learning; it lacks
in vigor, if it is not communicated to others. Wisdom calls
to her votaries on the highways, in order that the stream of
knowledge may overflow for many. For both the culture of
the intellect and the ennobling of the soul it is necessary that
man should step out of the narrow limits of self and come into
touch with a larger world. Only in devotion to his fellows is
man made to realize his own godlike nature. In the same
measure as he honors God's image in others, in foe as well as in
friend, in the most lowly servant as well in the most noble
master, man increases his own dignity. This is the fundamental
thought of morality as expressed in Job, especially in
the beautiful thirty-first chapter, and as embodied
in Abraham,<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Abraham.</note>
and later reflected in various Talmudic sayings about
the dignity of man.<note place='foot'>Abot. IV, 1; B. K. 79 b; Ber. 19 b.</note>
Everywhere man's relation to society
becomes a test of his own worth. The idea of interdependence
and reciprocal duty among all members of the human
family forms the outstanding characteristic of Jewish ethics.
For it is far more concerned in the welfare of society than in
that of the individual, and demands that those endowed with
fortune should care for the unfortunate, the strong for the
weak, and those blessed with vision for the blind. As God
Himself is Father to the fatherless, Judge of the widows, and
Protector of the oppressed, so should man be. <q>Works of
benevolence form the beginning and the end of the Torah,</q>
points out R. Simlai.<note place='foot'>Sota 14 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. It is in the life of the nation that the individual first
realizes that he is only a part of a greater whole. The nation
to which he belongs is the mother who nourishes him with her
spirit, teaches him to speak and to think, and equips him with
all the means to take part in the achievements and tasks of
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
humanity. In fact, the State, which guarantees to all its citizens
safety, order and opportunity under the law, and which arranges
the relations of the various groups and classes of society that
they may advance one another and thus promote the welfare
and progress of all, is human society in miniature. Here the
citizen first learns obedience to the law which is binding upon
all alike, then respect and reverence for the authority embodied
in the guardians of the law who administer justice <q>which is
God's,</q> and hence also loyalty and devotion to the whole, together
with reciprocal obligation and helpfulness among the
separate members and classes of society. The words of Jeremiah
to his exiled brethren, <q>Seek ye the peace of the city
whither I have caused you to be carried away captive, and pray
unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof shall ye have
peace,</q><note place='foot'>Jer. XXIX, 7; comp. Abot.
III, 2.</note> became the guiding maxim of Jewry when torn from
its native soil. It impressed upon them, once for all, the
deeply rooted virtues of loyalty and love for the country in
which they dwelt. To pray for the welfare of the State and
its ruler, under whose dominion all citizens were protected,
and so in modern times for its legislative and administrative
authorities, has become a sacred duty of the Jewish religious
community. To sacrifice one's life willingly, if need be, for
the welfare of the country in which he lived, was a demand
of loyalty which the Jew has never disregarded. <q>The law
of the State is as the law of God</q><note place='foot'>B.
K. 113 a and elsewhere.</note> taught Samuel the
Babylonian, and another sage of Babylon said, <q>The government
on earth is to be regarded as an image of God's government
in heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 58 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. But, after all, the community of the State or the nation
is too confined in its cultural work by its special interests and
particular tasks ever to reach the universal ideal of man, that
is, a perfected humanity. Where the interests of one State or
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
nation come into conflict with those of another, far too often
the result is enmity and murderous warfare. Therefore there
must be a higher power to quench the brands of war whenever
they flare up, to cultivate every motive leading toward peace
and harmony among nations, to impel men toward a higher
righteousness and to obviate all conflict of interests, because
in place of selfishness it implants in the heart the self-forgetfulness
of love. Religion is the power which trains peoples as well
as individuals toward the conception of one humanity, in the
same measure as it points to the one and only God, Ruler over
all the contending motives of men, the Source and Shield of all
righteousness, truth, and love, the Father of mankind as
the only foundation upon which the grand edifice of human
civilization must ultimately rest. Thus it teaches us to regard
the common life and endeavor of peoples and societies
as one household of divine goodness. Every system of
belief, every religious denomination which transcends the
limits of the national consciousness with a view to the
broader conception of mankind, and binds the national groups
and interests into a higher unity to include and influence all
the depths and heights of the human spirit, paves the way
toward the attainment of the mighty goal. In the same sense
the united efforts of the various classes and societies or States
for the common advance of culture, prosperity, national welfare
and international commerce, as well as of science and
art, tend unceasingly toward that full realization of the idea of
humanity which constitutes the brotherhood of man.
</p>

<p>
9. Not yet has any religious body, however great and remarkable
its accomplishments may have been, nor any of the
religious, scientific, or national organizations, much as they
have achieved, performed the sublime task which the prophets
of Israel foretold as the goal of history. Each one has
drawn to itself only a portion of mankind, and promised it
success or redemption and bliss, while the rest have been
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
excluded and denied both temporal and eternal happiness.
Each one has singled out one side of human nature in order to
link to it the entire absolute truth, but at the same time has
underestimated or cast aside all other sides of human life, and
thereby blocked the road to complete truth, which can
never be presented in final form, nor ever be the exclusive
possession of one portion of humanity. Judaism, which is
neither a religious nor a national system <emph>solely</emph>, but aims to be
a <emph>covenant with God</emph> uniting all peoples, lays claim to no
exclusive truth, and makes its appeal to no single group of
mankind. The Messianic hope, which aims to unite all races
and classes of men into a bond of brotherhood, has become an
impelling force in the history of the world, and both Christianity
and Islam, in so far as they owe their existence to this
hope and to the adoption of Jewish teachings, constitute parts
of the history of Judaism. Between these world-religions with
their wide domains of civilization stands the little Jewish
people as a cosmopolitan element. It points to an ideal
future, with a humanity truly united in God, when, through
ceaseless progress in the pursuit of ever more perfect ideals,
truth, justice, and peace will triumph,&mdash;to the realization
of the kingdom of God.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part III. Israel And The Kingdom Of God</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLVIII. The Election of Israel</head>

<p>
1. The central point of Jewish theology and the key to an
understanding of the nature of Judaism is the doctrine, <q>God
chose Israel as His people.</q> The election of Israel as the
chosen people of God, or, what amounts to the same, as the
nation whose special task and historic mission it is to be the
bearer of the most lofty truths of religion among mankind,
forms the basis and the chief condition of revelation. Before
God proclaimed the Ten Words of the Covenant on Sinai,
He addressed the people through His chosen messenger,
Moses, saying: <q>Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians,
and how I bore you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto
Myself. Now therefore, if ye will hearken unto My voice,
indeed, and keep My covenant, then ye shall be Mine own
treasure from among all peoples, for all the earth is Mine;
and ye shall be unto Me a kingdom of priests, and a holy
nation.</q><note place='foot'>Ex. XIX, 4-5.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. The fact of Israel's election by God as His peculiar
nation is repeated in Deuteronomy, with the special declaration
that God had found delight in them as the smallest of
the peoples, on account of the love and the faith He had sworn
to the Patriarchs.<note place='foot'>Deut. VII, 6-8; X, 15; XIV, 2.
Comp. Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>, 57 ff.</note>
It is accentuated in the Synagogal liturgy,
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
especially in the prayer for holy days which begins with the
words: <q>Thou hast chosen us from all peoples; Thou hast
loved us and found pleasure in us and hast exalted us above
all tongues; Thou hast sanctified us by Thy commandments
and brought us near unto Thy service, O King, and hast
called us by Thy great and holy name.</q><note place='foot'>See
Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerbook</hi>, 226 f.</note> Inasmuch as the
election of Israel is connected with the deliverance of the
people from Egypt, the whole relation of the Jewish nation
to its God assumes from the outset an essentially different
character from that of other nations to their deities. The
God of Israel is not inseparably connected with His people
by mere natural bonds, as is the case with every other ancient
divinity. He is not a national God in the ordinary sense.
He has chosen Israel freely of His own accord. <q>When
Israel was a child, then I loved him, and out of Egypt I called
My son,</q> says God through Hosea,<note place='foot'>Hos.
XI, 1; XII, 10; XIII, 4.</note> and thus prefers to call
Himself <q>thy God from the land of Egypt.</q> This election
from love is echoed also in Jeremiah, who said, <q>Israel is the
Lord's hallowed portion, His first-fruits of the increase.</q><note place='foot'>Jer.
II, 3.</note> The moral relation between God and Israel is most clearly
characterized, however, by Amos, in the words: <q>You only
have I known of all the families of the earth; therefore I
will visit upon you all your iniquities.</q><note place='foot'>Amos
III, 2.</note> Here is stated in
explicit terms that the God of history selected Israel as an
instrument for His plan of salvation, in the expectation that
he would remain faithful to His will.
</p>

<p>
3. The real purpose of the election and mission of Israel
was announced by the great prophet of the Exile when he
called Israel the <q>servant of the Lord,</q> who has been formed
from his mother's bosom and delivered from every other
bondage, in order that he may declare the praise of God
among the peoples, and be a harbinger of light and a bond of
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
union among the nations, the witness of God, the proclaimer
of His truth and righteousness throughout the
world.<note place='foot'>Isa. XLI, 8 f.; XLII, 6; XLIII, 10; XLIX, 8.</note> The
entire history of Israel as far back as the Patriarchs
was reconstructed in this light, and we find the election
of Abraham also similarly described in the
Psalms<note place='foot'>CV, 7 f., comp. Neh. IX, 7.</note> and in
the liturgy. Indeed, in every morning prayer for the past
two thousand years the Jewish people have offered thanks
to God for the divine teaching that has been intrusted
to their care, and praised Him <q>who has chosen Israel in
love.</q><note place='foot'>Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>, p. 40.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. The belief in the election of Israel rests on the conviction
that the Jewish people has a certain superiority over other
peoples in being especially qualified to be the messenger and
champion of religious truth. In one sense this prerogative
takes into account every people which has contributed something
unique to any department of human power or knowledge,
and therein has served others as pattern and guide. From
the broader standpoint, all great historic peoples appear as
though appointed by divine providence for their special cultural
tasks, in which others can at most emulate them without
achieving their greatness. Yet we cannot speak in quite the
same way of the election of the Greeks or Romans or of the
nations of remote antiquity for mastery in art and science,
or for skill in jurisprudence and statecraft. The fact is that
these nations were never fully conscious that they had a historic
or providential destiny to influence mankind in this
special direction. Israel alone was self-conscious, realizing
its task as harbinger and defender of its religious truth as
soon as it had entered into its possession. Its election, therefore,
does not imply presumption, but rather a grave duty
and responsibility. As the great seer of the Captivity had
already declared, to be the servant of the Lord is to undergo
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
the destiny of suffering, to be <q>the man of sorrow,</q> from
whose bruises comes healing unto all
mankind.<note place='foot'>Isa. LII, 3-LIII, 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. Accordingly the election of Israel cannot be regarded
as a single divine act, concluded at one moment of revelation,
or even during the Biblical period. It must instead be considered
a divine call persisting through all ages and encompassing
all lands, a continuous activity of the spirit which has
ever summoned for itself new heralds and heroes to testify
to truth, justice, and sublime faith, with an unparalleled
scorn for death, and to work for their dissemination by words
and deeds and by their whole life. Judaism differs from all
other religions in that it is neither the creation of one great
moral teacher and preacher of truth, nor seeks to typify the
moral and spiritual sublimity which it aims to develop in
a single person, who is then lifted up into the realm of the
superhuman. Judaism counts its prophets, its sages, and its
martyrs by generations; it is still demonstrating its power
to reshape and regenerate religion as a vital force. Moreover,
Judaism does not separate religion from life, so as to regard
only a segment of the common life and the national existence as
holy. The entire people, the entire life, must bear the stamp
of holiness and be filled with priestly consecration. Whether
this lofty aim can ever be completely attained is a question not
to be decided by short-sighted humanity, but only by God, the
Ruler of history. It is sufficient that the life of the individual
as well as that of the people should aspire toward this ideal.
</p>

<p>
6. Of course, the election of Israel presupposes an inner
calling, a special capacity of soul and tendency of intellect
which fit it for the divine task. The people which has given
mankind its greatest prophets and psalmists, its boldest
thinkers and its noblest martyrs, which has brought to fruition
the three great world-religions, the Church, the Mosque,
and&mdash;mother of them both&mdash;the Synagogue, must be the
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
religious people <hi rend='italic'>par excellence</hi>. It must have within itself
enough of the heavenly spark of truth and of the impetus
of the religious genius as to be able and eager, whenever and
wherever the opportunity is favorable, to direct the spiritual
flight of humanity toward the highest and holiest. In fact,
the soul of the Jewish people reveals a peculiar mingling of
characteristics, a union of contrasts, which makes it especially
fit for its providential mission in history. Together with the
marked individuality of each person we find a common spirit
highly sensitive to every encroachment. Here there is a
tenacious adherence to what is old and traditional, and there
an eager assimilation of what is new and strange. On the
one hand, a materialistic self-interest; on the other, an
idealism soaring to the stars.<note place='foot'>Meg.
16 a.</note> The sages of the Tannaitic
period already remarked that Israel has been intrusted with
the law which it is to defend and to disseminate, just because
it is the boldest and most obstinate of nations.<note place='foot'>Beza 25 b.</note> On
the other hand, the three special characteristics of the Jewish people
according to the Talmud are its chastity and purity of life,
its benevolence and its active love for humanity.<note place='foot'>Yeb. 79 a.</note>
A heathen scoffer calls Israel <q>a people of generous impulses which
promised at Sinai to do what God would command, even
before it had hearkened to the commandments.</q><note place='foot'>Shab. 88 a.</note>
<q>Gentle and shy as a dove, it is also willing like the dove to stretch
out its neck for the sacrifice, for love of its heavenly Father,</q>
says the Haggadist.<note place='foot'>Cant. R. IV,
2; Tanh. Tezaveh 1.</note> And yet R. Johanan remarks that
Israel, called to be the bearer of light to the world, must be
pressed like the olive before it will yield its precious
oil.<note place='foot'>Menah. 53 b with ref. to Jer. XI, 16.</note>
Every individual in Israel possesses the requisite qualities
for a holy priest-people, according to a Midrash of the Tannaitic
period, and hence we read in Deuteronomy, <q>The Lord
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
hath chosen thee to be His own treasure out of all peoples
that are upon the face of the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Sifre to Deut. XIV, 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. All these and similar sayings disprove completely the
idea that the election of Israel was an arbitrary act of God.
It is due rather to hereditary virtues and to tendencies of
mind and spirit which equip Israel for his calling. To this
must be added the important fact that God educated the
people for its task through the Law, which was to make it
conscious of its priestly sanctity and keep it ever active in
mind and heart. The election of Israel is emphasized in
Deuteronomy especially in connection with the prohibition
of marriage with idolaters and with the prohibition of unclean
animals, which also originated in the priestly
laws.<note place='foot'>Deut. VII, 6; XIV, 2.</note> The
underlying idea is that the mission of Israel to battle for the
Most High imperatively demands separation from the heathen
peoples, and on the other hand, that its priestly calling necessitates
an especial abstinence. And as has the law in its
development and realization for thousands of years, so has also
God's wise guidance trained Israel in the course of history
so as to render him at times the unyielding preserver and
defender and at other times the bold champion and protagonist
of the highest truth and justice, according as the outlook and
the mental horizon of the period were narrow or broad.
</p>

<p>
8. It is true that the thought of Israel's calling and mission
in world-history first became clear when its prophets and sages
attained a view of great world-movements from the lofty
watch-tower of the centuries, so that they could take cognizance
of the varying relations of Judaism to the civilized
peoples around. The summons of the Jewish people to be
heralds of truth and workers for peace is first mentioned in
Isaiah and Micah,<note place='foot'>Isa. II, 3;
Micah IV, 2&mdash;passages considered by modern critics to be of
exilic origin.</note> while only in the great movement of nations
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
under Cyrus did the seer of the Exile recognize the peculiar
mission of Israel in the history of the world. If in gloomy
periods the outlook became dark, still the hope for the fulfillment
of this mission was never entirely lost. In fact,
the contact of the Jewish people with Greek culture after
Alexander the Great gave new power and fresh impetus to
the conception of Israel's mission,<note place='foot'>See
Bousset, l. c., 60-99.</note> as the rich Hellenistic literature
and the vision of Daniel in chapter VII testify. In
fact, Abraham, the ancestor of the Jewish people, became for
the earliest Haggadists a wandering missionary and a great
preacher of the unity of God, and his picture was the pattern
for both Paul and Mohammed.<note place='foot'>Gen. R.
to Gen. XII, 4, and see J. E., art. Abraham.</note> The election of Israel is
clearly and unequivocally expressed by Rabbi Eleazar ben
Pedath in the words, <q>God sent Israel among the heathen
nations that they may win a rich harvest of proselytes, for,
as God said through Hosea, <q>I will sow her unto Me in the
land,</q> so He wishes from this seed to reap a bountiful and
world-wide harvest.</q><note place='foot'>Pes. 87 b. with ref. to Hosea II, 25.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. In the Middle Ages, when the historical viewpoint
and the idea of human progress were both lacking, the belief
in the mission of Israel was confined to the Messianic hope.
Both Jehuda ha Levi and Maimonides, however, regard
Christianity and Islam as preparatory steps for the Messiah,
who is to unify the world through the knowledge of
God.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>
IV, 23; Maim. H. Melakim XI, 4.</note>
<q>The work of the Messiah is the fruit, of which Israel will
be universally acknowledged as the root,</q> says the Jewish
sage in the Cuzari. Therefore he rightly accepts the election
of Israel as a fundamental doctrine of belief. Modern times,
however, with their awakened historical sense and their idea
of progress, have again placed in the foreground the belief
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
in the election and mission of Israel. The founders of reform
Judaism have cast this ancient doctrine in a new form. On
the one hand, they have reinterpreted the Messianic hope
in the prophetic spirit, as the realization of the highest ideals
of a united humanity. On the other, they have rejected the
entire theory that Israel was exiled from his ancient land
because of his sins, and that he is eventually to return there
and to restore the sacrificial cult in the Temple at Jerusalem.
Therefore the whole view concerning Israel's future had to
undergo a transformation.<note place='foot'>See Geiger:
Zeitschr. 1868, p. 18 ff.; 1869, 55 ff.</note> The historic mission of Israel as
priest of humanity and champion of truth assumed a higher
meaning, and his peculiar position in history and in the Law
necessarily received a different interpretation from that of
Talmudic Judaism or that of the Church. As individuals,
indeed, many Jews have taken part in the achievements and
efforts of all civilized peoples; the Jewish people as such has
accomplished great things in only one field, the field of religion.
The following chapters will consider more closely
how Judaism has taken up and carried out this sacred mission.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_XLIX'/>
<head>Chapter XLIX. The Kingdom of God and the Mission of Israel</head>

<p>
1. The hope of Judaism for the future is comprised in the
phrase, <q>the kingdom of God,</q>&mdash;<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>malkuth
shaddai</foreign> or <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>malkuth
Shamayim</foreign>,&mdash;which means the sovereign rule of God.
From ancient times the liturgy of the Synagogue concludes
regularly with the solemn <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Alenu</foreign>,
in which God is addressed
as the <q>King of kings of kings</q>&mdash;king of kings being the
Persian title for the ruler of the whole Empire&mdash;and directly
after this the hope is expressed that <q>we may speedily behold
the glory of Thy might, when Thou wilt remove the abominations
from the earth, and the idols will be utterly cut off;
when the world will be perfected under the kingdom of the
Almighty, and all the children of flesh will call upon Thy name;
when Thou wilt turn unto Thyself all the wicked of the earth.
Let all the inhabitants of the earth perceive and know that
unto Thee every knee must bend, and every tongue give
homage. Let them all accept the yoke of Thy kingdom,
and do Thou reign over them speedily, and forever and
ever.</q><note place='foot'>J. E., art. <hi rend='italic'>Alenu</hi>;
Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>, 76 f.</note>
At the close of the Torah lesson in the house of learning the
assembly regularly recited the blessing, <q>Praised be Thy
name! May Thy kingdom soon come!</q>&mdash;afterwards known
as the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Kaddish</foreign>,<note place='foot'>J.
E., art. Kaddish.</note> and reëchoed in the so-called <q>Lord's Prayer</q>
of the Church. The words of the prophet, <q>The Lord shall
be King over all the earth; in that day shall the Lord be One,
and His name One,</q><note place='foot'>Zech. XIV,
9.</note> voiced for all ages this ideal of the future,
and thus gave a goal and a purpose to the history of the world
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
and at the same time centered it in Israel, the chosen people
of God.
</p>

<p>
2. The establishment of the kingdom of the One and Only
God throughput the entire world constitutes the divine plan
of salvation toward which, according to Jewish teaching,
the efforts of all the ages are tending. This <q>Kingdom of
God</q> is not, however, a kingdom of heaven in the world to
come, which men are to enter only after death, and then only
if redeemed from sin by accepting the belief in a supernatural
Savior as their Messiah, as is taught by the Church. Judaism
points to God's Kingdom on <emph>earth</emph> as the goal and hope of
mankind, to a world in which all men and nations shall turn
away from idolatry and wickedness, falsehood and violence,
and become united in their recognition of the sovereignty
of God, the Holy One, as proclaimed by Israel, His servant
and herald, the Messiah of the nations. It is not the hope
of bliss in a future life (which is the leading motive of Christianity),
but the building up of the divine kingdom of truth,
justice, and peace among men by Israel's teaching and
practice.<note place='foot'>See Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>,
89 f., 93 f.</note>
In this sense God speaks through the mouth of the
prophet, <q>I will also give thee for a light of the nations, that
My salvation may be unto the end of the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
XLIX, 6.</note> <q>All the ends of the
earth shall see the salvation of our God.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. LII, 10</note>
<q>The remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many peoples, as
dew from the Lord, as showers upon the grass.</q><note place='foot'>Micah V, 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. Clearly, the idea of a world-kingdom of God arose only
as the result of the gradual development of the Jewish God-consciousness.
It was necessary at first that the prophetic
idea of God's kingship, the theocracy in Israel, should triumph
over the monarchical view and absorb it. The patriarchal
life of the shepherd was certainly not favorable to a monarchical
rule. <q>I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
over you, the Lord shall rule over you,</q> said Gideon in refusing
the title of king which the people had offered
him.<note place='foot'>Judg. VIII, 23.</note> According
to one tradition Samuel blamed the people for desiring
a king and thereby rejecting the divine
kingship.<note place='foot'>I Sam. VIII, 7; XII, 12, 17 f.</note> <q>I give
thee a king in Mine anger,</q> says God through
Hosea.<note place='foot'>Hos. XIII, 11.</note> The
more the monarchy, with its exclusively worldly and materialistic
aims, came into conflict with the demands of the prophets
and their religious truth, the higher rose the prophetic hope
for the dawning of a day when God alone would rule in absolute
sovereignty over the entire world. Now, in the kingdom
of the Ten Tribes, with its frequently changing dynasties,
the old patriarchal conception was dominant, while in the
kingdom of Judah, which remained loyal to the house of
David, the monarchical idea developed. Isaiah, living in
Jerusalem and favorably disposed towards the monarchy,
prophesied that a shoot from the house of David, endowed
with marvelous spiritual powers, should come forth, occupying
the throne in the place of God, and through his victories
would plant righteousness and the knowledge of God everywhere
upon earth, and establish throughout the world a
wonderful reign of peace.<note place='foot'>Isa. IX, 5; XI, 1-10.</note>
Upon this royal <q>shoot</q> of David<note place='foot'>Isa.
IV, 2; Jer. XXIII, 5; XXXII, 15; and Zech. III, 8; VI, 12. Here
Zerubbabel is referred to.</note>
rested the Messianic hope during the Exile, and amidst the
disappointments of the time this vision became all the more
idealized. In contrast to this the great prophet of the Exile
announced the establishment of the absolute dominion of God
as the true <q>King of Israel</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XLI,
21; XLIII, 15; XLIV, 6. Comp. XLIII, 22.</note> over all the earth by the nucleus
of Israel, <q>the servant of God,</q> who would become conscious
of his great historic mission in the world and be willing
to offer his very life in its cause. In all this the prophet
makes no reference to the royal house of David, but makes
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
bold to confer the title of the <q>anointed of God</q>&mdash;that is,
Messiah&mdash;upon Cyrus, the king of Persia, as the one who
was to usher in the new era.<note place='foot'>Isa.
XLV, 1.</note> Subsequently these two divergent
hopes for the future run parallel in the Psalms
and the liturgy as well as in the apocryphal and rabbinic
literature.
</p>

<p>
4. While the Messianic aspirations as such bore rather a
political and national character in Judaism (as will be explained
in Chapter <ref target='Chapter_LIII'>LIII</ref>), yet the religious hope for a universal
kingdom of God took root even more deeply in the heart
of the Jewish people. It created the conception of Israel's
mission and also the literature and activity of the Hellenistic
propaganda, and it gave a new impetus to the making
of proselytes among the heathen, to which both Christianity
and Islam owe their existence. The words of Isaiah, repeated
later by Habakkuk, <q>The earth will be full of the knowledge
of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea,</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
XI, 9; Hab. II, 14.</note> became now an
article of faith. While in earlier times the rule of Israel's
God, JHVH, was attached to Zion, from whose holy mount
He ruled as invisible King,<note place='foot'>Isa. VI, 5;
XXIV, 23. Comp. Jer. XLVI, 18; XLVIII, 15.</note> later on we find Zechariah proclaiming
Him who was enthroned in heaven as having dominion
over the entire earth,<note place='foot'>Zech. XIV, 9; Mal.
I, 14.</note> and the Psalter summons all nations
to acknowledge, adore, and extol Him as King of the
world.<note place='foot'>Ps. XXII, 29; XCIII, 1; XCV, 99.</note>
Nay, at the very time when Judah lay humbled to the ground,
the prophet exclaimed, <q>Who would not fear Thee, O King
of the nations? for it befitteth Thee; forasmuch as among
all the wise men of the nations, and in all their royalty there
is none like unto Thee.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. X, 7.
This chapter is post-exilic; comp. Jer. XLVI, 18; XLVIII,
15 and I Chron. XXIX, 11.</note> Israel's great hope for the future
is expressed most completely and in most sublime language
in the New Year liturgy: <q>O Lord our God, impose Thine
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
awe upon all Thy works, and let Thy dread be upon all that
Thou hast created, that they may all form one single band to
do Thy will with a perfect heart.... Our God and God of
our fathers, reveal Thyself in Thy splendor as King over all
the inhabitants of the world, that every handiwork of Thine
may know that Thou hast made it, and every creature may
acknowledge that Thou hast created it, and whatsoever hath
breath in its nostrils may say: the Lord God of Israel is King,
and His dominion ruleth over all.</q><note place='foot'>Singer's
<hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>, 239.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. In the earlier period, then, the rule of JHVH seems to
have been confined to Israel as the people of His covenant.
During the Second Temple Jerusalem was called the <q>city
of the great King</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XLVIII,
3.</note> and the constitution was considered by
Josephus to have been a theocracy, that is, a government by
God.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cont. Apion</hi>,
II, 16, 7.</note> Indeed, the entire Mosaic code has as its main purpose
to make Israel a <q>kingdom of priests,</q> over which JHVH,
the God of the covenant, was alone to rule as King. The
chief object of the strict nationalists, in opposition to the
cosmopolitanism of the Hellenists, was that this government
of God, in its intimate association with the Holy Land and
the Holy People, should be maintained unchanged for all the
future. Thus the book of Daniel predicts the speedy downfall
of the fourth world-kingdom and the establishment of the
kingdom of God through Israel, <q>the people of the saints of
the Most High; their kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom.</q><note place='foot'>Dan. VII, 27.</note>
Naturally, such a purely nationalistic conception of the rulership
of God does not admit the thought of a mission or its
corollary, the conversion of the heathen.<note place='foot'>See
J. E., art. Zealots.</note> These appear
among the liberal school of Hillel in their opposition to the
more rigorous Shammaites and the party of the
Zealots.<note place='foot'>Shab. 31 a.</note>
It is, therefore, quite consistent that the modern nationalists
should again dispute the mission of Israel.
</p>

<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>

<p>
6. As soon as Jewish monotheism had once been conceived
by the Jewish mind as the universal truth, the idea of
the mission of Israel as a bearer of light and a witness of
God for the nations, as enunciated by Deutero-Isaiah, became
ever more firmly established. Many Psalms exhort the
people to make known the wondrous doings of God among
the nations, so that the heathen world might at last acknowledge
the One and Only God.<note place='foot'>Ps. XXII, 28;
LXVII, 3; LXXXVI, 10; CXVII, 1.</note> Nay, Israel is even called
God's anointed and prophet,<note place='foot'>Ps.
CV, 15.</note> and in one Psalm we find Zion,
the city of God, elevated to be the religious metropolis of the
world.<note place='foot'>Ps. LXXXVII, 5. See
Commentaries and LXX.</note> The book of Jonah is simply a refutation of the
narrow nationalistic conception of Judaism; it holds forth
the hope of the conversion of the heathen to the true knowledge
of God. In the same spirit Ruth the Moabitess became
the type of the heathen who are eager to <q>take refuge under
the wings of God's majesty.</q><note place='foot'>Ruth
II, 12. Comp. Lev. R. II, 8.</note> The author of the book of
Job no longer knows of a national God; to him God is the
highest ideal of morality as it lives and grows in the human
heart. The wisdom literature also teaches a God of humanity.
Under His wings Shem and Japheth, the teaching of the Jew
and the wisdom of the Greek, can join hands; the religious
truth of the one and the philosophic truth of the other may
harmoniously blend.
</p>

<p>
7. Thus a new impulse was given to Jewish proselytism
in Alexandria, and the earlier history of Israel, especially the
pre-Israelite epoch with its simple human types, was read
in a new light. Enoch<note place='foot'>See both Enoch books and
B. Sira XLIV, 16.</note> and Noah<note place='foot'>Sibyll. I,
128-170; Sanh. 108 a.</note> became preachers of penitence,
heralds of the pure monotheism from which the heathen
world had departed. Abraham especially, the progenitor
of Israel, was looked upon as a prototype of the wandering
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
missionary people, converting the heathen.<note place='foot'>Gen. R. XXXIX, 21.</note>
Wherever he journeyed, his teaching and his example of true benevolence
won souls for the Lord proclaimed by him as the <q>God of
the heaven and the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Sifre Deut.
313, with ref. to Gen. XXIV, 3.</note> In this sense of missionary activity
were now interpreted the words, <q>Be thou a blessing ...
and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed.</q><note place='foot'>See Dillmann's Comm. to
Gen. XII, 2; XXII, 18; and Kuenen: <hi rend='italic'>The
Prophets and Prophecy</hi>, 373, 457.</note>
This was no longer understood in the original sense, that
Abraham by his prosperity should be an example of a blessed
man, to be pointed out in blessing others; the words were
given the higher meaning that Abraham with his descendants
should become a source of blessing for mankind through his
teachings and his conduct, so that all the families of men
should attain blessing and salvation by following his doctrine
and example. Thus the idea of the Jewish mission was connected
with Abraham, the <q>father of a multitude of nations,</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
XVII, 5.</note>
and this was later on adopted by Paul and Mohammed in
establishing the Church and the Mosque.
</p>

<p>
8. In contradistinction, then, to the political concept of
the kingdom of God, which Ezekiel still hoped to see established
by the exercise of external power,<note place='foot'>Ezek. XX, 33.</note> the idea
assumed now a purely spiritual meaning. This kingdom of God is
accepted by the pious Jew every morning through his confession
of the divine Unity in the Shema. Abraham had
anticipated this, say the rabbis, when he swore by the God
of heaven and earth, and so also had Israel in accepting the
Torah at Sinai and at the Red Sea.<note place='foot'>Sifre,
l. c.</note> In fact, the kingdom of
God began, we are told, with the first man, since, when he
adored God freely as King of the world, every living creature
acknowledged Him also. But only when Israel as a people
proclaimed God's dominion at the Red Sea, was the throne
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
of God and His kingdom on earth established for
eternity.<note place='foot'>P. D. R. El. XI; Mek. Yithro 6; Lev. R. II, 4.</note>
And when Ezekiel says: <q>With a mighty hand will I be
King over you,</q> they explain this to mean that the people
chosen as the servant of God will be continually constrained
anew by the prophets to recognize His
kingdom.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sifra</hi> Behukkothai VIII with
ref. to Ezek. XX, 33; Sanh. 105 a.</note> Yea, the
closing words of the Song at the Red Sea, <q>The Lord shall
reign for ever and ever</q> were taken to imply that all the
nations would in the end recognize only Israel's One God as
King of the world.<note place='foot'>Mek. Beshallah X, p. 52.</note>
As a matter of fact, the rabbinical view
is that every proselyte, in <q>taking upon himself the yoke
of the sovereignty of God,</q> enters that divine Kingdom
which at the end of time will embrace all men
and nations.<note place='foot'>Tanh. Lek leka 6.</note>
In the book of Tobit and the Sibylline Oracles also we find
this universalistic conception of the Messianic age
expressed.<note place='foot'>Tobit XIII, 1-11; Sibyll. III, 47, 76 b.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. Accordingly, proselytism found open and solemn recognition
both before and after the time of the Maccabees, as
we see in the Psalms,&mdash;especially those which speak of
proselytes in the term, <q>they that fear the Lord,</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
CXVII; CXVIII, 4. See chapter <ref target='Chapter_LVI'>LVI</ref>.</note> and also
in the ancient synagogal liturgy, where the <q>proselytes of
righteousness</q> are especially mentioned.<note place='foot'>Singer's
<hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>, 48.</note> The school of
Hillel followed precisely this course. Matters changed,
however, under the Roman dominion, which was contrasted
to the dominion of God especially from the time of Herod,
when the belief became current that <q>only when the one is
destroyed, will the other arise.</q><note place='foot'>Mek. Amalek
at close; Cant. R. II, 28; IV Ezra VI, 9-10.</note> Particularly after the
Christian Church had become identified with Rome, all missionary
endeavors by the Jews were considered dangerous
and were therefore discouraged as much as possible. In their
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
place arose the hope for a miraculous intervention of God.
In Hellenistic circles the Messiah was believed to be the future
founder of the kingdom of God,<note place='foot'>B.
Wisdom V, 16; Sibyll. III, 76 b.</note> which assumed more and
more of an other-worldly nature, such as the Church developed
for it later on.
</p>

<p>
10. The more the harsh oppression of the times forced the
Jew to isolate himself and to spend his life in studying and
practicing the law,&mdash;which was tantamount to <q>placing
himself under the kingdom of God,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sifra</hi>
Kedoshim at close; Sifre Deut. 323.</note> the more he lost sight
of his sublime mission for the world at large. Only individual
thinkers, such as Jehuda ha Levi and Maimonides, kept a
vision of the world-mission of Israel, when they called Jesus
and Mohammed, as founders of Christianity and Islam, messengers
of God to the idolatrous nations, divinely appointed
to bring them nearer to Israel's truth,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>
IV, 23; Maim. <hi rend='italic'>H. Melakim</hi> XI, 4.</note> or when they pointed
forward to the time when all peoples will recognize in the
truth their common mother and in God the Father of all
mankind.<note place='foot'>Maim.: Commentary to Eduyoth
at close.</note> A most instructive Midrash on Zechariah IX, 9
gives the keynote of this belief. <q>At that time God as the
King of Zion will speak to the righteous of all times, and say
to them, <q>Dear as the words of My teaching are to Me, yet
have ye erred in that ye have followed only My Torah, and
have not waited for My world-kingdom. I swear to you that
I shall remember for good him who has waited for My kingdom,
as it is said, Wait ye for Me until the day that I rise up as a
witness.</q></q><note place='foot'>Pes. R. XXXIV, p. 158 ref. to
Zeph. III, 8. See Friedman's note.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, it was owing to the sad consequences
of the missionary endeavors of the Church that the idea of
the mission of Judaism was given a different direction. Not
conversion, but conviction by teaching and example, is the
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
historic task of Judaism, whose maxim is expressed in the
verse of Zechariah, <q>Not by might, nor by power, but by My
spirit, saith the Lord of hosts.</q><note place='foot'>Zech.
IV, 6.</note> It is not the creed, but
the deed, which tells. Not the confession, but conduct,
with the moral principles which govern it, counts. Such a
view is implied in the well-known teaching of Joshua ben
Hananiah, <q>The righteous of all nations will have a share
in the world of eternal bliss.</q><note place='foot'>Tos.
Sanh. XIII, 2.</note> Judaism does not deny
salvation to those professing other religions, which would
tend to undermine the foundation of their spiritual life. Standing
upon the high watchtower of time, it rather strives ever
to clarify and strengthen the universal longing for truth
and righteousness which lies at the heart of all religion, and
is thus to become a bond of union, an all-illuminating light
for the world. To quote the beautiful words of Leopold
Stein in his <hi rend='italic'>Schrift des Lebens</hi>:<note place='foot'>P.
374-378.</note> <q>Judaism, while recognizing
the historic justification of all systems of thought and faith,
does not cherish the ambition to become the Church Universal
in the usual sense of the term, but aims rather to be the focus,
or mirror, of religious unity for all the rest. <q>The people
from of old,</q> as the prophet called them, are to accompany
mankind in its progress through the ages and the continents,
until it reaches the goal of the kingdom of God on earth, the
<q>new heaven and new earth</q> of the prophetic
vision.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. LXVI, 22.</note> The
thought of the Jewish mission is most adequately expressed
in the Neilah service of the Union Prayer Book, based upon
the Einhorn Prayerbook, which reads as
follows:<note place='foot'>Part II, p. 332.</note> <q>Endow
us, our Guardian, with strength and patience for our holy mission.
Grant that all the children of Thy people may recognize
the goal of our changeful career, so that they may exemplify
by their zeal and love for mankind the truth of Israel's watchword:
One humanity on earth, even as there is but One God
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
in heaven. Enlighten all that call themselves by Thy name
with the knowledge that the sanctuary of wood and stone,
which erst crowned Zion's hill, was but a gate through which
Israel should step out into the world, to reconcile all mankind
unto Thee!</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter L. The Priest-people and its Law of Holiness</head>

<p>
1. The checkered, stormy, and yet triumphant march of
the Jewish people through the ages remains the great enigma
of history for all those who do not believe in a divine plan of
salvation to be consummated through Israel. The idea of
Israel's mission alone throws light on its law and its destiny.
Even before God had revealed to the people at Mt. Sinai
the Ten Commandments, the foundation of all religion and
morality, and there concluded with them a covenant for all
time, He spoke: <q>Ye shall be unto Me a kingdom of priests
and a holy nation,</q> thus consecrating them to be a priest-people
among the nations, and enjoining them to a life of
especial holiness. Possessing as a heritage from the Patriarchs
the germ of a higher religious consciousness, in distinction
from all other peoples, they were to make the cultivation,
development, and promotion of the highest religious truth
their life-task, and thus to become the people of God. At
first they were to establish in the Holy Land a theocratic
government, a State in which God alone was the Ruler, while
they lived in priestly isolation from all the nations around.
Thus they prepared themselves for the time when, scattered
over all the earth, they might again work as the priest-people
through the ages for the upbuilding of the universal kingdom
of God. This was Israel's destiny from the very first, as expressed
by the great seer of the Exile when he beheld Israel
wandering forth among the nations, <q>Ye shall be named the
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
priests of the Lord; men shall call you the ministers of our
God.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. LXI, 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. Among all religions the priest is considered especially
holy as the mediator between God and man, and in his appearance
as well as in his mode of life he must observe special
forms of purity and holiness. He alone may approach the
Godhead, ascertain its will, and administer the sacrificial cult
in the sanctuary. He must represent the Divinity in its
relation to the people, embody it in his outward life, enjoy
nothing which it abhors, and touch nothing which could render
him impure. These priestly rules exist among all the nations
of antiquity in striking similarity, and indicate a common
origin in the prehistoric period, during which the entire cult
developed through a priestly caste, beginning with simple,
primitive conceptions and transmitted in ever more elaborate
form from father to son. It goes without saying that the
priests of the original Hebrew race, which migrated from
Babylonia, retained the ancient customs and rules. They
must also have adopted many other things from neighboring
peoples. During the entire period of the first temple, the
priests&mdash;despite all prophetic warnings&mdash;preferred the
heathen cult with its vainglorious pomp to the simple worship
of the patriarchal times. As everywhere else, the priesthood
of Israel, and later of Judæa as well, thought only of its own
interests, of the retention of its ancient prerogatives, unmindful
of the higher calling to which it had been chosen, to serve
the God of truth and justice, to exemplify true holiness,
to stand for moral rather than ceremonial purity. Yet the
sacerdotal institutions were indispensable so long as the
people required a sanctuary where the Deity should dwell,
and where the sacrificial cult should be administered. Every
trespass by a layman on the sanctuary reserved for the priests
was considered sacrilege and called for divine punishment.
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
It was thus necessary to deepen the popular notion of holiness
and of the reverence due the sanctuary, before these could be
elevated into the realm of spirituality and morality. The
priesthood had to be won for the service of the loftier religious
ideas, so that it might gradually educate the people in general
for its sublime priestly mission. This conception underlies
both the Mosaic law and its rabbinical interpretation.
</p>

<p>
3. Through Biblical and post-Biblical literature and history
there runs a twofold tendency, one anti-sacerdotal,&mdash;emanating
from the prophets and later the Hasideans or
Pharisees,&mdash;the other a mediating tendency, favorable to
the priesthood. The ritualistic piety of the priests was
bitterly assailed by the prophets as being subversive of all
morality, and later on the Sadducean hierarchy also constituted
a threat to the moral and spiritual welfare of the
people. Before even the revelation at Sinai was to take
place, we read that warning was given to the priests <q>not
to break through</q> and stand above the people.<note place='foot'>Ex. XIX, 22 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, the law demands of the Aaronites a
peculiar degree of holiness, since <q>they offer the bread of their
God upon the altar.</q><note place='foot'>Lev. XXI, 6;
XXII, 2.</note> Their blood must be kept pure by
the avoidance of improper marriages. Everything unclean
or polluting must be kept far from
them.<note place='foot'>Lev. VIII, 2, 8.</note> The law, following
a tradition which probably arose in ancient Babylon,
prescribed minutely their mode of admission into the divine
service, their vestments and their conditions of life, the ritual
of sacrifice and of purity; and every violation of these laws,
every trespass by a layman, was declared to be punishable
with death.<note place='foot'>Num. XVIII, 7.</note>
The sanctuary contains no room for the <emph>nation</emph>
of <emph>priests</emph>; no layman durst venture to cross its threshold.
Even in the legal system of the rabbis the ancient rights and
privileges of the priesthood, dating from the time when they
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
possessed no property, remained inviolate, and their precedence
in everything was undisputed.<note place='foot'>M. K. 28 b.</note>
</p>

<p>
The glaring contrast between the idea of a universal priesthood
of the people and the institution of the Aaronites is
explained by a deeper insight into history. The success of
the reformation under Josiah on the basis of the Deuteronomic
code rested in the last analysis on the fact that the priests
of the house of Zadok at Jerusalem were placed in the service
of the higher prophetic teaching by being rendered the guardians,
executors, and later, in conjunction with the Levites,
the teachers of the Law, as it was presented in the book of the
law of Moses, soon afterward completed. The priesthood,
deprived of everything that might remind one of the former
idolatry and heathenish practices, was, in its purer and holier
character, to lead the priest-people to true moral holiness
through its connection with the sanctuary and its ancient
cult. Still the impulse for the moral rebirth of the nation,
for the establishment of a priest-people, did not emanate
from the Temple priesthood, nor even from the sacred soil of
Palestine; but from the Synagogue, which began in the Exile,
under the influence of the prophetic word and the Levitical
song, in the form of public worship by the congregation of
the pious. Here arose a generation of godly men, a class of
singularly devout ones, living in priestly holiness, who consecrated
their lives to the practice of the law, and whom the
exile seer had designated as the true Israel, the servant of the
Lord, and these formed the nucleus of the renewed Israel.
</p>

<p>
4. That which the prophet Ezekiel had attempted in his
proposed constitution<note place='foot'>Ezek. XL-XLVIII.</note>
was accomplished in a far more thorough
manner by the Holiness Code, which emanated from
his school and became the central portion of the Mosaic
books, and by the so-called Priestly Code, which followed
later. The object was to bring about the sanctification of
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
the entire people upon the holy soil of the national land,
through institutions embodying the ideal of the holiness of
God in the life and cult of the people. Circumcision, idealized
by the prophetic author of Deuteronomy,<note place='foot'>Deut.
X, 16. Comp. Jer. IX, 24.</note> was to be made the
sign of the covenant to mark as holy the progeny
of Abraham;<note place='foot'>Gen. XVII, 9.</note>
strict laws of marriage were to put an end to all heathenish
unchastity; the Sabbath rest was to consecrate the labors
of the week, the Sabbatical month and year the produce of
the soil.<note place='foot'>Lev. XXV, 1-24.</note>
The prohibition of unclean foods, heretofore reserved,
as among other nations, for the priests and other consecrated
persons, was now applied to the whole community
in order that Israel should learn <q>to set itself apart from all
other nations as a holy people.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XIV, 2-11;
Lev. XI. Comp. Ezek. XLIV, 31, and Judg. XIII, 4.</note> Even their apparel was to
proclaim the priestly holiness of the people by a blue fringe
at the border of the garments.<note place='foot'>Num. XV, 40.</note>
</p>

<p>
Whereas from the time of Ezra to Simon the Just priestly
rulers endeavored to promote the work of educating the
people for holiness, the pious men from among the people
made still greater efforts to assert the claim of holiness for
the entire Jewish people as a priest-nation.<note place='foot'>See
J. E., art. Pharisees.</note> The repasts
of these pious fellowships should be in no way inferior in
sanctity to those of the priests in the Temple. New ceremonies
of sanctification were to open and close the Sabbaths
and festivals. Symbols of priestly consecration should adorn
forehead and arm in the form of the phylacteries
(<foreign rend='italic'>tefillin</foreign>),
and should be placed at the entrance of every house in the
so-called <foreign rend='italic'>mezuzzah</foreign>. <q>God has given unto all an
heritage (the Torah), the kingdom, the priesthood, and the
sanctuary</q><note place='foot'>II Macc. II, 17.</note>&mdash;this
became the <hi rend='italic'>leitmotif</hi> for the Pharisaic school, who constantly
enlarged the domain of piety so that it should include
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
the whole of life. Whoever did not belong to this circle of
the pious was regarded with scorn as one of the lower class
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>am ha-aretz</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
5. The chief effort of the pious, the founders of the Judaism
of the Synagogue, was to keep the Jewish people from the demoralizing
influences of pagan nature-worship, represented
first by Semitic and later by Greek culture. The leaders of
the Pharisees <q>built a fence about the
law</q><note place='foot'>Aboth. I, 1.</note> extending the
prohibition of mingling with the heathen nations so as also
to prohibit eating with them and participating in their feasts
and social gatherings,&mdash;not for the preservation of the Jewish
race merely, as Christian theologians maintain, but for the
sake of keeping its inner life intact and pure.<note place='foot'>See Perles:
<hi rend='italic'>Bousset</hi>, 68, 89.</note> <q>God surrounded
us with brazen walls, hedged us in with laws of purity
in regard to food and drink and physical contact, yea, even
to that which we see and hear, in order that we should be pure
in body and soul, free from absurd beliefs, not polluted by
contact with others or through association with the wicked;
for most of the peoples defile themselves with their sexual
practices, and whole lands pride themselves upon it. But
we hold ourselves aloof from all this</q>&mdash;so spoke Eleazar
the priest to King Ptolemy Philadelphus, according to the
Letter of Aristeas, thus giving expression to the sentiment
most deeply rooted in the souls of the pious of that
period.<note place='foot'>Aristeas 139-152.</note>
They strove to build up a nation of whom the Tannaim
could say, <q>Whoever possesses no sense of shame and chastity,
of him it is certain that his ancestors did not stand at
Sinai.</q><note place='foot'>Ned. 20 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
Naturally enough, the Greek and Roman people took
offense at this aloofness and separation from every contact
with the outer world, and explained it as due to a spirit of
hostility to mankind. Even up to the present it has been the
lot of Jewry and Judaism to be misunderstood by the world
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
at large, to be the object of either its hate or its pity. The
world disregards the magnificence of the plan by which an
entire people were to be reared as a priest-nation, as citizens
of a kingdom of God, among whom, in the course of centuries,
the seed of prophetic truth was to germinate and sprout forth
for the salvation of humanity. If, in complete contrast to
heathen immorality, the Jew in his life, his thinking, and his
will was governed by the strictest moral discipline; if, in
spite of the most cruel persecutions and the most insidious
temptations, the Jewish people remained steadfast to its
pure belief in God and its traditional standards of chastity,
exhibiting a loyalty which amazed the nations and the religious
sects about, but was neither understood nor followed
by them, this was mainly due to the hallowing influences
of the priestly laws. They steeled the people for the fulfillment
of their duty and shielded them against all hostile
powers both within and without. The very <emph>burden</emph> of the
law, so bitterly denounced by Christianity since the time
of Paul, lent Judaism its dignity at all times, protecting it
from the assaults of the tempter; and that which seemed to
the outsider a heavy load was to the Jew a source of pride
in the consciousness of his divine election.<note place='foot'>See
Schechter, <hi rend='italic'>Studies</hi>, I, 233 ff. I. Abrahams in
J. Q. R. XI, 62; b ff.,
and Claude Montefiore, J. Q. R. XIII, 161-217.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Chapter_L_Section_6'/>
6. But most significant in the character and development
of Judaism is the fact that all the leading ideas and motives
which emanated from the priesthood of the Jewish people
were concentrated in one single focus, the <emph>hallowing of the name
of God</emph>. Two terms expressed this idea in both a negative
and a positive form, the warning against
<q><foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hillul ha Shem</foreign></q>&mdash;profanation
of the name of God&mdash;and the duty of <q><foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Kiddush
ha Shem</foreign></q>&mdash;sanctification of God's name. These
exerted a marvelous power in curbing the passions and self-indulgence
of the Jew and in spurring him on to the greatest
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
possible self-sacrifice and to an unparalleled willingness to
undergo suffering and martyrdom for the cause. These
terms are derived from the Biblical verse, <q>Ye shall not profane
My holy name, but I will be hallowed among the children
of Israel; I am the Lord who halloweth you.</q><note place='foot'>Lev. XXII, 32.</note>
This verse forms the concluding sentence of the precepts for the Aaronitic
priesthood and warns them as the guardians of the sanctuary
to do nothing which might in the popular estimation
degrade them or the divine cause intrusted to them. When,
however, during the Maccabean wars, the little band of the
pious proved themselves to be the true priesthood in their
Opposition to the faithless Aaronites, offering their very lives
as a sacrifice for the preservation of the true faith in God,
the Scriptural word received a new and higher meaning.
It came to signify the obligation of the entire priest-people
to consecrate the name of God by the sacrifice of their lives,
and also their duty to guard against its profanation by any
offensive act. In connection with this Scriptural passage
the sages represent God as saying, <q>I have brought you out
of Egypt only on the condition that you are ready to sacrifice
your lives, if need be, to consecrate My
name.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sifra Emor.</hi> IX.</note> From that
period it became a duty and even a law of Judaism, as Maimonides
shows in his Code, for each person in life and in death
to bear witness to His God.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Yesode ha Torah</hi>
V. Comp. Lazarus: <hi rend='italic'>Ethics</hi>, 29, 184.</note>
<q>Ye are My witnesses, saith the Lord, and I am God</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
XLIII, 12.</note>&mdash;and witnesses being in the Greek
version martyrs, the word afterward received the meaning
of <q>blood-witnesses.</q>&mdash;This passage of the prophet is commented
on by Simeon ben Johai, one of the great teachers
who suffered under Hadrian's persecution, in the following
words, <q>If ye become My witnesses, then am I your Lord,
God of the world; but if ye do not witness to Me, I cease to
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
be, as it were, the Lord, God of all the world.</q><note place='foot'>Pesik.
102 b.</note> That is to
say, it is the martyrdom of the pious which glorifies God's
name before all the world. Or, as Felix Perles says so beautifully,
<q>As every good and noble man must ever bear in
mind that the dignity of humanity is intrusted to his hand,
so should each earnest adherent of the Jewish faith remember
that the glory of God is intrusted to his
care.</q><note place='foot'>Perles, l. c., 68 f.</note> The Jewish
people has fulfilled this priestly task through a martyrdom
of over two thousand years and has scornfully resisted every
demand to abandon its faith in God, not consenting to do
so even in appearance. Surely historians or philosophers
who can ridicule or commiserate such resistance betray a
hatred which blinds their sense of justice. As a matter
of fact, it was the consciousness of the Jewish people of
its priestly mission that has made it a pattern of loyalty
for all time.
</p>

<p>
7. Moreover, the fear of profaning the divine name became
the highest incentive to, and safeguard of the morality of the
Jew. Every misdeed toward a non-Jew is considered by the
teachers of Judaism a double sin, yea, sometimes, an unpardonable
one, because it gives a false impression of the moral
standard of Judaism and infringes upon the honor of God
as well as that of man. The disciples of Rabbi Simeon ben
Shetach once bought an ass for him from an Arab, and to their
joy found a precious stone in its collar. <q>Did the seller
know of this gem?</q> asked the master. On being answered
in the negative, he called out angrily, <q>Do you consider
me a barbarian? Return the Arab his precious stone immediately!</q>
And when the heathen received it back, he
cried out, <q>Praised be the God of Simeon ben
Shetach!</q><note place='foot'>Yer. B. M. II, 8 c.</note>
Thus the conscientious Jew honors his God by his conduct,
says the Talmud, referring to this and many similar examples.
Such lessons of the Jew's responsibility for the recognition
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
of the high moral purity of his religion have ever constituted
a high barrier against immoral acts.
</p>

<p>
The words, <q>Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am holy</q>
form significantly the introduction to the chapter on the
love of man, the nineteenth chapter of Leviticus, placed at
the very center of the entire Priestly Code. <q>Your self-sanctification
sanctifies Me, as it were,</q> says God to Israel,
according to the interpretation of this verse by the
sages.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sifra</hi> Kedoshim 1.</note>
In contrast to heathendom, which deifies nature with its
appeal to the senses, Judaism teaches that holiness is a moral
quality, as it means the curbing of the senses. And in order
to prevent Israel, the bearer of this ideal of holiness, from
sinking into the mire of heathen wantonness and lust, the
separation of the Jew from the heathen world, whether in
his domestic or social life, was a necessity and became the
rule and maxim of his life for that period. All the many
prohibitions and commands had for their object the purification
of the people in order to render the highest moral
purity a hereditary virtue among them, according to the
rabbis.<note place='foot'>Mak. 23 b.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. It is true that the accumulation of <q>law upon law, prohibition
upon prohibition</q> by the rabbis had eventually the
same injurious effect which it had exerted upon the priests
in the Temple. The formal law, <q>the precepts learned by
rote,</q> became the important factor, while their purpose
was lost to sight. The shell smothered the kernel, and
blind obedience to the letter of the law came to be regarded
as true piety. It cannot be denied that adherence to the mere
form, which was transmitted from the Temple practice to the
legalism of the Pharisees and the later rabbinic schools with
their casuistry, impaired and tarnished the lofty prophetic
ideal of holiness. It almost seems as if the clarion notes of
such sublime passages as that of the Psalmist,
</p>

<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Who shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord,</q></l>
<l>And who shall stand in His holy place?</l>
<l>He that hath clean hands and a pure heart;</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Who hath not taken My name in vain, and hath not sworn
deceitfully,</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XXIV, 3-4; XV, 1-5.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
no longer found its full resonance in the heart of Judaism. In
the practice of external acts of piety religion became petrified
and the spirit took flight. That which is of secondary importance
became of primary consideration. This is the fundamental
error into which the practice and the development of
the Law in Judaism lapsed, and to which no careful observer
can or dares close his eyes. Undoubtedly the Law, as it
embraced the whole of life in its power, sharpened the Jewish
sense of duty, and served the Jew as an iron wall of defense
against temptations, aberrations, and enticements of the centuries.
As soon as the modern Jew, however, undertook to
free himself from the tutelage of a blind acceptance of authority
and inquired after the purpose of all the restrictions which
the Law laid upon him, his ancient loyalty to the same collapsed
and the pillars of Judaism seemed to be shaken. Then the
leaders of Reform, imbued with the prophetic spirit, felt it to
be their imperative duty to search out the fundamental ideas
of the priestly law of holiness, and, accordingly, they learned
how to separate the kernel from the shell. In opposition
to the orthodox tendency to worship the letter, they insisted
on the fact that Israel's separation from the world&mdash;which
it is ultimately to win for the divine truth&mdash;cannot itself
be its end and aim, and that blind obedience to the law
does not constitute true piety. Only the fundamental idea,
that Israel as the <q>first-born</q> among the nations has been
elected as a priest-people, must remain our imperishable
truth, a truth to which the centuries of history bear witness
by showing that it has given its life-blood as a ransom for
humanity, and is ever bringing new sacrifices for its cause.
</p>

<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>

<p>
Only because it has kept itself distinct as a priest-people
among the nations could it carry out its great task in history;
and only if it remains conscious of its priestly calling and therefore
maintains itself as the people of God, can it fulfill its mission.
Not until the end of time, when all of God's children
will have entered the kingdom of God, may Israel, the high-priest
among the nations, renounce his priesthood.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter LI. Israel, the People of the Law, and its World Mission</head>

<p>
1. Judaism differs from all the ancient religions chiefly
in its intrusting its truth to the whole people instead of a
special priesthood. The law which <q>Moses commanded us
is an inheritance of the Congregation of
Jacob,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XXXIII, 4.</note> is the
Scriptural lesson impressed upon every Jew in early childhood.
As soon as the Torah passed from the care of the
priests into that of the whole nation, the people of the book
became the priest-nation, and set forth to conquer the world
by its religious truth. This aim was expressed by all the
prophets beginning with Moses, who said: <q>Would that all
the Lord's people were prophets, that the Lord would put
His spirit upon them.</q><note place='foot'>Num. XI,
29.</note> The prophetic ideal was that <q>they
shall all know Me (God), from the least of them unto the
greatest of them,</q><note place='foot'>Jer. XXXI,
34.</note> and that <q>all thy (Zion's) children shall
be taught of the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. LIV,
13.</note> After the people came to realize
that the Law was <q>their wisdom and understanding in the
sight of the peoples,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. IV,
6.</note> they soon felt the hope that one day
<q>the isles shall wait for His teaching,</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
XLII, 4.</note> and confidently
expected the time when <q>many peoples shall go and say,
Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to
the house of the God of Jacob; and He will teach us of His
ways, and we will walk in His paths, for out of Zion shall go
forth the law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. II, 3; Micah IV, 2.</note>
Once liberated from the dominance of the priesthood, religion
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
became the instrument of universal instruction, the
factor of general spiritual and moral advancement. In
addition it endowed humanity with an educational ideal,
destined to regenerate its moral life far more deeply than
Greek culture could ever do. The object was to elevate all
classes of the people by the living word of God, by the reading
and expounding of the Scripture for the dissemination of
its truth among the masses.
</p>

<p>
2. Those who define Judaism as a religion of law completely
misunderstand its nature and its historic forces.
This is done by all those Christian theologians who endeavor
to prove the extraordinary assertion of the apostle Paul that
the Jewish people was providentially destined to produce
the Old Testament law and become enmeshed in it, like
the silkworm in its cocoon, finally to dry up and perish,
leaving its prophetic truth for the Church. This fateful
misconception of Judaism is based upon a false interpretation
of the word <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Torah</foreign>,
which denotes moral and spiritual instruction
as often as law, and thus includes all kinds of religious
teaching and knowledge together with its primary meaning,
the written and the oral codes.<note place='foot'>See Guedemann:
<hi rend='italic'>Das Judenthum</hi>, 67 f.; <hi rend='italic'>Jued. Apologetik</hi>,
12b; Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Studies</hi>, I, 233 f., and
<hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>, I, 116 f.</note> In fact, in post-Biblical
times it comprised the entire religion, as subject of both
instruction and scientific investigation. True, law is fundamental
in Jewish history; Israel accepted the divine covenant
on the basis of the Sinaitic code; the reforms of King
Josiah were founded on the Deuteronomic
law;<note place='foot'>II Kings XXII, 8 f.</note> and the
restoration of the Judean commonwealth was based upon the
completed Mosaic code brought from Babylon by Ezra the
Scribe.<note place='foot'>Neh. VIII-X.</note> This
book of law, with its further development and
interpretation, remained the normative factor for Judaism
for all time. Still, from the very beginning the Law of the
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
covenant contained a certain element which distinguished
it from all the priestly and political codes of antiquity. Beside
the traditional juridical and ritualistic statutes, which
betray a Babylonian origin, it contains laws and doctrines of
kindness toward the poor and helpless, the enemy and the
slave, even toward the dumb beast, in striking contrast to
the spirit of cruelty and violence in the Babylonian
law.<note place='foot'>See Gunkel: <hi rend='italic'>Israel u. Babylonien</hi>;
Jeremias: <hi rend='italic'>Moses u. Hammurabi</hi>;
H. Grimme: <hi rend='italic'>D. Gesetz Chammurabi's u. Moses'</hi>;
George Cohen: <hi rend='italic'>D. Gesetze
Hammurabi's</hi>; D. M. Mueller: <hi rend='italic'>D.
Gesetz Hammurabi's u. d. mosaische Gesetzgebung</hi>.</note>
In the name of the all-seeing, all-ruling God it appeals to the
sympathy of man. These exhortations to tenderness increase
in later codes of law under the prophetic influence, until
finally the rabbis extended them as far as possible. They
held that every negligence which leads to the loss of life or
property by the neighbor, every neglect of a domestic animal,
even every act of deceit by which one attempts to
<q>steal</q> the good opinion of one's fellow-men, is a violation
of the law.<note place='foot'>See Chapter LIX.</note>
Hence Rabbi Simlai, the Haggadist, said that
from beginning to end the Law is but a system of teachings
of human love,<note place='foot'>Sota 14 a.</note>
while another sage tried to prove from the
books of Moses that God implanted mercy, modesty, and
benevolence in the souls of Israel as hereditary
virtues.<note place='foot'>Yer. Kid. IV, 1; 65 c.</note>
In the same spirit Rabbi Meir described the law of Israel as
the law of humanity, supporting his statement by a number
of biblical passages.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sifra</hi>
Ahare Moth 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. But, as light by its very nature illumines its surroundings,
so the Torah in the possession of the Jewish people
was certain to become the light of mankind. First of all,
the book of Law itself insists that the father shall teach the
word of God to his children, using many signs and ceremonies
that they may meditate on the works of God and walk in
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
the path of virtue, and that the divine commands should
be <q>in the mouth and in the heart of all to do
them.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. VI, 7; XI, 19; XXX, 14; Ex. XIII, 9.</note> It
was made incumbent upon the high priest or king to read the
Law at least once every seven years to the whole people assembled
in the holy city for the autumnal festival,&mdash;men,
women, children, and the sojourners in the gates,&mdash;so that
it should become their common property.<note place='foot'>Deut.
XXXI, 12.</note> This precept
probably gave rise to the triennial and later the annual
system of Torah reading on the Sabbath. But in addition
to the book of Law the prophetic words of consolation were
read to the people, a custom which originated in the Babylonian
exile, and was continued under the name of
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Haftarah</foreign>
(<q>dismissal</q> of the congregation).<note place='foot'>See Elbogen:
<hi rend='italic'>D. Jued. Gottesdienst</hi>, 174 f.</note> The seer of the exile
refers to these prophetic words of comfort which were offered
to the people on the Sabbath as well as other feasts and
fasts: <q>Attend unto Me, O My people, and give ear unto
Me, O My nation, for instruction (Torah) shall go forth from
Me, and My right on a sudden for a light of the people....
Hearken unto Me, ye that know righteousness, the people
in whose heart is My law; fear ye not the taunt of men,
neither be ye dismayed at their revilings. For the moth
shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat
them like wool; but My favor shall be forever, and My
salvation unto all generations.</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
LI, 4, 7-8.</note> Moved by such stirring
ideals, Synagogues arose in Jewish settlements all over the
globe, and the book of the Law, in its vernacular versions,
Greek and Aramaic, together with the words of the prophets,
became the general source of instruction. In the words of
the Psalms, it became <q>the testimony of the Lord, making
wise the simple,</q> <q>rejoicing the heart,</q> <q>enlightening the
eyes,</q> <q>more to be desired than gold.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
XIX, 7-10.</note> Nay more, the
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
study of the Law became the duty of every man, and he who
failed to live up to the precepts of the devotees of the Law,
the Pharisean fellowships, was scorned as belonging to the
lower class, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>am haaretz</foreign>.
Every morning the pious Jew, first
thanking God for the light of day, followed this up by thanking
Him for the Torah, which illumines the path of life. <q>The
welfare of society rests upon the study of the Law, divine
service and organized charity,</q> was a saying of Simon the
Just, a high priest of the beginning of the third pre-Christian
century.<note place='foot'>Aboth I, 2.</note>
Thus learning and teaching became leading occupations
for the Jew, and the two main departments of Jewish
literature, correspondingly, are <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Torah</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Talmud</foreign>, that is,
the written Law and its exposition. Indeed, the highest
title which the rabbis could find for Moses was simply <q>Moses
our Teacher.</q> Nay, God Himself was frequently represented
as a venerable Master, teaching the Law in awful
majesty.<note place='foot'>Mek. Beshallah 45 b, note
by Friedman; Yalkut Yithro 286.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. Later under the successive influence of Babylonian and
Greek culture, the wisdom literature was added to the Prophets
and the Psalms, giving to the whole Torah a universal
scope, like that claimed for Greek philosophy. The Jewish
love of learning led to an ever greater longing for truth by
adding the wisdom of other cultured nations to its own store
of knowledge. This motive for universalism became all
the stronger, as the faith became more centered in the sublime
conception of God as Master of all the world. As the
God of Israel appeared the primal source of all truth, so the
revealed word of God was considered the very embodiment
of divine wisdom.<note place='foot'>B. Sira XXIV, 8-10; comp.
Bousset, l. c., 136 f.</note> In fact, the men of hoary antiquity described
in the opening chapters of Genesis were actually
credited with being the instructors of the Greeks and other
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
nations.<note place='foot'>See Josephus: <hi rend='italic'>Cont. Apion.</hi>
II, 36 f., 39; Aristobulus in Eusebius: Prep.
Ev. XIII, 121, 413; <hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>, I, 63 f.; II,
66; comp. Cassel, l. c. ad loc.</note> We read a strange story by a pupil of Aristotle
that the great sage admired a Jew, whom he happened to
meet, as both wise and pious, so that the little Jewish nation
was often considered, like the wise men of India, to be a
sect of philosophers.<note place='foot'>Josephus, l. c.,
I, 22; Gutschmidt: <hi rend='italic'>Kleine Schriften</hi>, IV, 578; Th. Reinach:
<hi rend='italic'>Textes Relatifs au Judaism</hi>,
11-13.</note> Indeed, Judaism became a matter of
curiosity to the pagan world on account of the Synagogue,
which attracted them as a unique center of religious devotion
and instruction, and especially because of the Bible, which
was read and expounded in its Greek garb from Sabbath to
Sabbath. The Jewish people raised themselves to be a nation
of thinkers, and largely through association with Greek
thought. For example, in the Greek translation of the
Scriptures all anthropomorphic expressions are avoided.
As the personal name of Israel's God of the covenant,
<foreign lang='he' rend='bold'>JHVH</foreign>,
was replaced by the name <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Adonai</foreign>,
<q>the Lord,</q><note place='foot'>J. E., art. Adonai.</note> the universality
of the Jewish God became still more evident. Thus
the pagan world could find God in the Scriptures to be the
living God who dwells in the heart and is sought by all mankind.
The Jew became the herald of the One God of the
universe, his Bible a book of universal instruction. Many
of the heathen, without merging themselves into the community
of the covenant people and without accepting all
its particularistic customs, rallied around its central standard
as simple theists, <q>worshipers of God,</q> or <q>they who
fear the Lord,</q> according to the terminology of the
Psalms.<note place='foot'>Ps. CXV, 11; CXVIII, 4; comp. Bernays:
<hi rend='italic'>Ges. Abh.</hi>, II, 71; Schuerer,
l. c., III, 124 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. An old rabbinical legend, which is reflected in the
New Testament miracle of Pentecost, relates that the Ten
Words of Sinai were uttered in seventy tongues of fire to reach
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
the known seventy nations of the earth.<note place='foot'>Shab.
88 b.; Ex. R. V, 9; Tanh. Shemoth, ed. Buber, 22; Midr. Teh. Ps.
LXVIII, 6; Acts II, 6; Spitta: <hi rend='italic'>Apostelgeschichte</hi>,
27, referring to Philo II, 295.</note> We are told that
when the people entered Canaan, the words of the Law were
engraved in seventy languages on the stones of the altar at
Mount Ebal.<note place='foot'>Sifre Deut. XXXIII, 2; XXVII,
8; Sota 35 b.</note> That is, the law of Sinai was intended to
provide the foundation for all human society. One Haggadist
even asserts that the heathen nations all refused to
accept the Law, and if Israel also had rejected it, the world
would have returned to chaos.<note place='foot'>Shab.,
88 a, b.</note> Israel was, so to speak,
<emph>forced</emph> by divine Providence to accept the Law on behalf of
the entire race. Hillel, under the Romanized reign of Herod,
was fully conscious of this world-mission when he said:
<q>Love your fellow creatures and lead them to the study of
the Law.</q><note place='foot'>Aboth I, 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. The outlook for the Jewish people, however, became
darker and darker through its struggle with Rome. The
fanatical Zealots entirely opposed the spreading of the knowledge
of the Torah among those who did not belong to the
household of Israel.<note place='foot'>J. E., art.
Zealots.</note> Then the Church sent forth her missionaries
to convert the pagan world by constant concessions
to its polytheistic views and practices. The seed
sown by Hellenistic Judaism yielded a rich harvest for the
Church, even though it was won at the sacrifice of pure
Jewish monotheism. The Ten Words of Sinai, the Mosaic
laws of marriage, the poor laws, and other Biblical statutes
became the cornerstone of civilization, but in a different
guise; the heritage of Judaism was transplanted to the
Christian and Mohammedan world in a new garb and under
a new name. Henceforth the Jew, dispersed, isolated, and
afflicted, had to struggle to preserve his faith in its pristine
purity. The very danger besetting the study of the Law during
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
the Hadrianic persecutions, which followed the Bar Kochba
revolt, increased his zeal and courage. <q>Devoid of the
Torah, our vital element, we are surely threatened with
death,</q> said Rabbi Akiba, applying to himself the fable of
the fox and the fishes, as he defied the Roman
edict.<note place='foot'>Ber. 61 b.</note> The
fear lest the Torah should be forgotten, stimulated the teachers
and their disciples ever anew to its pursuit. The Torah was
regarded as the bond and pledge of God's nearness; hence
the many rabbinical sayings concerning its value in the eyes
of God, which are frequently couched in poetic and extravagant
language.<note place='foot'>Weber, l. c., 46-56; he
fails completely to grasp this spirit.</note> The underlying idea of them all is that
Israel could dispense with its State and its Temple, but not
with its storehouse of divine truth, from which it constantly
derives new life and new youth.
</p>

<p>
7. One important question, however, remains, which
must be answered: Has the Jewish people, shut up for centuries
by the ramparts of Talmudic Judaism, actually renounced
its world mission? In transmitting part of its
inheritance to its two daughter-religions, has Judaism lost
its claim to be a world-religion? The Congregation of
Israel, according to the Midrash, answers this question in
the words of the Shulamite in the Song of Songs: <q>I sleep,
but my heart waketh.</q><note place='foot'>Song of Songs,
V, 2.</note> During the sad period of the Middle
Ages, Judaism in its relation to the outer world slept a long
winter-sleep, now in one land and now in another, but its
inner life always manifested a splendid activity of mind and
soul, exerting a mighty influence upon the history of the
world. It was declared dead by the ruling Church, and yet
it constantly filled her with alarm by the truths it uttered.
The Jewish people was given over to destruction and persecution
a thousand times, but all the floods of hatred and
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
violence could not quench its flame. Its marvelous endurance
constituted the strongest possible protest against the
creed of the Church, which claimed to possess an exclusive
truth and the only means of salvation. To suffer and die
as martyrs by thousands and tens of thousands, at the stake
and under the torture of bloodthirsty mobs, testifying to
the One Only God of Israel and humanity, was, to say the
least, as heroic a mission as to convert the heathen. Indeed,
the Jew, in reciting the Shema each morning in the house
of God, renewed daily his zeal and faith, by which he was
encouraged to sacrifice himself for his sacred heritage.
</p>

<p>
8. But the cultivation of the Torah, obligatory upon
every Jew, effected more even than the preservation of
monotheism. Alongside of the Church, which did its best
to suppress free thought, Islam provided a culture which
encouraged study and investigation, and this brought the
leading spirits in Judaism to a profounder grasp of their
own literary treasures. Bold truth-seekers arose under the
Mohammedan sway who had the courage to break the chains
of belief in the letter of the Scripture, and to claim the right
of the human reason to give an opinion on the highest questions
of religion. The leading authorities of the Synagogue
followed a different course from that of the Church, which
had brought the Deity into the sphere of the senses, divided
the one God into three persons, and induced the people to
worship the image of Mary and her God-child rather than
God the Father. They insisted on the absolute unity and
spirituality of God, eliminated all the human attributes
ascribed to Him in Scripture, and strove to attain the loftiest
and purest possible conception of His being. It took a
mighty effort for the people of the Law to reëxamine the entire
mass of tradition in order to harmonize philosophy and religion,
and invest the divine revelation with the highest spiritual
character. This mental activity exerted a great influence
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
upon the whole course of thought of subsequent centuries
and even upon modern philosophy. Again Israel became
conscious of his mission of light. Jewish thinkers, often
combining rabbi, physician, and astronomer in one person,
carried the torch of science and free investigation, directly
or indirectly, into the cell of many a Christian monk, rousing
the dull spirit of the Middle Ages and bringing new intellectual
nurture to the Church, else she might have starved
in her mental poverty.
</p>

<p>
The Jews of Spain became the teachers of Christian Europe.
The forerunners of the Protestant Reformation sat at the
feet of Jewish masters. Jewish students of the Hebrew
language, scientifically trained, opened up the simple meaning
of the Scriptural word, so long hidden by traditional
interpretation. The Lutheran and the English translations
of the Bible were due to their efforts, and thus also the rise
of Protestantism, which inaugurated the modern era. Yet
this intellectual revival, this wonderful activity of various
thinkers among medieval Jewry, required a soil susceptible
to such seeds, an atmosphere favorable to this intense search
for truth. This existed only in the Jewish people, since the
universal study of the Torah brought it about that <q>all the
children of Israel had light in their dwellings</q> even while
dense darkness covered the nations of the medieval world.
</p>

<p>
9. We must not underrate the cultural mission of the
Jewish people, with its striking contrast to the New Testament
point of view, which created monasteries and the celibate
ideal, and thus discouraged industry, commerce, and
scientific inquiry. Dispersed as they were, the Jewish people
cultivated both commerce and science, and thus for centuries
were the real bearers of culture, the intermediaries between
East and West. While the Church divided mankind into
heirs of heaven and hell, thus sowing discord and hatred, the
little group of Jews maintained their ideal of an undivided
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
humanity. But even their industrial and commercial activity
had more than a mere economic significance. Forced
upon the Jew by external pressure, it was favored by Jewish
teaching as a means of promoting spiritual life. Not poverty
and beggary, but wealth begotten by honest toil has the
sanction of Judaism in accordance with the saying <q>Where
there is no flour for bread, there can be no support for the study
of the Torah.</q><note place='foot'>Aboth. III, 21.</note>
Moreover, the rabbis interpreted the verse,
<q>Rejoice, O Zebulun, in thy going out, and thou, Issachar,
in thy tents,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XXXIII, 18.
See Gen. R. XCIX, 11.</note> as meaning that Zebulun, the seafarer, shared
the profit of his commerce with Issachar, who taught the law
in the tents of the Torah, that he, in turn, might share his
brother's spiritual reward. Indeed, the Jew used his gains
won by trade in the service of the promotion of learning,
and thus his entire industry assumed a higher character.
Our modern civilization, with its higher values of life, owes
much to the cultural activity of the medieval Jew, which
many leaders of the ruling Church still ignore completely. It
is true that the hard struggle for their very existence kept the
people unconscious of their cultural mission, and only now
that they have attained the higher historical point of view
can they exclaim with Joseph their ancestor: <q>As for you,
ye meant evil against me; but God meant it for good, to
bring it to pass, as it is this day, to save much people
alive.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. L, 20.</note>
The fact is that Jewish commerce has been an important
cosmopolitan factor in the past, and is still working, to a
certain extent, in the same direction.<note place='foot'>See
J. E., art. <q>Commerce</q>; American Encyclopedia, art. Jewish Commerce;
Publ. Am. Hist. Soc. X, 47; Schulman in <hi rend='italic'>Judaean Addresses</hi>,
II, 77 ff., and Lecky: <hi rend='italic'>Rationalism in Europe</hi>, II, 272.</note>
</p>

<p>
10. New and great tasks have been assigned by divine
Providence to the Jew of modern times, who is a full citizen
in the cultural, social, and political life of the various nations.
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
These tasks are most holy to him as Jew, the bearer of a
great mission to the world, which is embodied in his heritage,
the Torah. However splendid may have been his achievements
in the fields of industry and commerce, of literature
and art, his own peculiar possession is the Torah alone, the
religious truth for which he fought and suffered all these
centuries past; this must forever remain the central thought,
the aim of all his striving.<note place='foot'>See Saadia:
<hi rend='italic'>Emunoth</hi>, III, 17, quoted by Schechter:
<hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>, 105.</note> Every achievement of the Jewish
people, every attainment in power, knowledge, or skill,
must lead toward the completion of the divine kingdom of
truth and justice; that for which the Jew laid the foundation
at the beginning of his history is still leading forward
the entire social life of man to render it a divine household of
love and peace. In order that it may carry out the world
mission mapped out by its great seers of yore, the Jewish
people must guard against absorption by the multitude of
nations as much as against isolation from them. It must
preserve its identity without going back into a separation
rooted in self-adulation and clannishness. Instead, the
great goal of Israel will be reached only by patient endurance
and perseverance, confidently awaiting the fulfillment in
God's own time of the glorious prophecy that all the nations
shall be led up to the mountain of the Lord by the priest-people,
there to worship God in truth and righteousness.
The Law is to go forth from Zion and the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem, as a spiritual, not a geographical center. This
vision forms the highest pinnacle of human aspiration, rising
higher and higher before the mind, as man ascends from one
stage of culture to another, striving ever for perfection, for
the sublimest ideal of life. This is characteristically expressed
by the Midrash, which refers to the Messianic vision:
<q>And it shall come to pass in the end of days, that the mountain
of the Lord's house shall be established as the top of the
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills.</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
II, 2; Micah IV, 1; see Pesik 144 b; Midr. Teh. Ps. XXXVI, 6;
LXXXVII, 3.</note> <q>One
great mountain of the earth will be piled upon the other, and
Mount Zion will be placed upon the top as the culminating
point of all human ascents.</q> Taken in a figurative sense,
in which alone the saying is acceptable, this means that all
the heights of the various ideals will finally merge into the
loftiest of all ideals, when Israel's one holy God will be acknowledged
as the One for whom all hearts yearn, whom all
minds seek as the Ideal of all ideals.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_LII'/>
<head>Chapter LII. Israel, the Servant of the Lord, Martyr and Messiah
Of the Nations</head>

<p>
1. <q>If there are ranks in suffering, Israel takes precedence.
If the duration of sorrows and the patience with which they
are borne, ennoble, the Jews are among the aristocracy of
every land. If a literature is called rich which contains a
few classic tragedies, what shall we say to a national
tragedy lasting for fifteen hundred years, in which the poets
and the actors are also the heroes?</q> With these classic
words Leopold Zunz introduces the history of sufferings
which have occasioned the hundreds of plaintive and penitential
songs of the Synagogue described in his book, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Synagogale Poesie des Mittelalters</hi>. They are the cries of a
nation of martyrs, resounding through the whole Jewish
liturgy, and appearing already in many of the Psalms: <q>Thou
hast given us like sheep to be eaten; and hast scattered us
among the nations. Thou makest us a taunt to our neighbors,
a scorn and a derision to them that are round about us.
All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten Thee,
neither have we been false to Thy covenant: Nay, for Thy
sake are we killed all the day; we are accounted as sheep
for the slaughter. Awake, why sleepest Thou, O Lord?
Arouse Thyself, cast not off forever. Wherefore hidest
Thou Thy face, and forgettest our affliction and our
oppression?</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XLIV, 12-25.</note>
Thus the congregation of Israel laments; and
what is the answer of Heaven?
</p>

<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>

<p>
2. The Bible contains two answers: the first by Ezekiel,
priest and prophet; the other by the great unknown seer
of the Exile whose words of comfort are given in the latter
part of Isaiah. Ezekiel gave a stern and direct answer: <q>The
nations shall know that the house of Israel went into captivity
because of their iniquity, because they broke faith
with Me, and I hid My face from them; so I gave them into
the hand of their adversaries, and they fell all of them by the
sword. According to their uncleanness and according to
their transgressions did I unto them; and I hid My face
from them. Therefore thus saith the Lord God: Now will
I bring back the captivity of Jacob, and have compassion
upon the whole house of Israel; and I will be jealous for My
holy name. And they shall bear their shame, and all their
breach of faith which they committed against
Me.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. XXXIX, 23-26.</note> These
words are echoed in the harrowing admonitory chapter of
Leviticus, which, however, closes with words of comfort:
<q>And they shall confess their iniquity ... if then perchance
their uncircumcised heart be humbled, and they then be
paid the punishment of their iniquity; then will I remember
My covenant with Jacob, and also My covenant with Isaac,
and also My covenant with Abraham will I remember;
and I will remember the land.</q><note place='foot'>Lev. XXVI,
40-42.</note> This view of divine justice
as external and punitive was basic to the Synagogue liturgy
and the entire rabbinic system. The priestly idea of atonement,
that sin could be wiped out by sacrifice, made a profound
impression, not only upon individual sinners, but also
upon the nation. Hence it was applied especially to the
people in exile when they could not bring sacrifices to their
God. Still, one means of atonement remained, the exile
itself, which could lead the people to repentance and finally
to God's forgiveness.<note place='foot'>I Kings VIII, 47-50.</note>
Thus the people retained a hope of
return from their captivity. They were assured by their
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
prophetic monitors that the faithful community of the Lord
would again be received in favor by the God of faithfulness.
They even built their hope upon the portions of the Law,
which was read to assembled worshipers that they might
know and observe it on their return to the land of their
fathers. Israel could say with the Psalmist: <q>Unless Thy
law had been my delight, I should then have perished in
mine affliction.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. CXIX, 92.</note>
According to a Palestinian Haggadist,
<q>Israel would never have persevered so long, had not the
Torah, the marriage contract of Israel with its God, pledged
to it a glorious future on the holy soil.</q><note place='foot'>Pesik.
139 b.</note> Wait patiently for
God's mercy, which in His own time will rebuild Israel's
State and Temple!&mdash;this is the keynote of all the prayers
and songs of the Synagogue.
</p>

<p>
3. But the great seer of the exile, whose anonymity lends
still greater impressiveness to his words of comfort, stood on
a higher historical plane than that of Ezekiel the priest. He
witnessed the transformation of the entire political world
of his time through the victory of Cyrus the Mede over the
Babylonian empire, and thus was able to attain a profounder
grasp of the destiny of his own nation. Hence he was not
satisfied with the view of Ezekiel. The latter had applied
the popular saying, <q>The fathers have eaten sour grapes,
and the children's teeth are set on edge,</q><note place='foot'>Ezek.
XVIII, 2.</note> to refute the
belief that an individual was punished for the sins of his
fathers; but he failed to extend this doctrine to the whole
nation. Whatever sins were committed by the generation
who were exiled, their children ought not to suffer for them
<q>in double measure.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XL,
2.</note> Moreover, the realm of love has a
higher law than atonement through retribution. Love brings
its sacrifice without asking why. By willing sacrifice of self
it serves its higher purpose. He who struggles and suffers
silently for the good and true is <emph>God's servant</emph>, who cannot
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
perish. He attains a higher glory, transcending the fate
of mortality. This is the new revelation that came to the
seer, as he pondered on the destiny of Israel in exile,
illumining for him that dark enigma of his people's tragic
history.
</p>

<p>
The problem of suffering, especially that of the servant
of God, or the pious, occupied the Jewish mind ever since
the days of Jeremiah and especially during the exile. The
author of the book of Job elaborated this into a great theodicy,
speaking of Job also as the <q>servant of the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Job
I, 8; II, 3; XLII, 7, 8.</note> Whatever
pattern our exilic seer employed, beside the chapters
about the Servant of the Lord,<note place='foot'>Isa. XLII,
1 f.; XLIX, 1; L, 4; LII, 13-LIII, 12.</note> whatever tragic fate of some
great contemporary the plaintive song in the fifty-second
and fifty-third chapters referred to (some point to Jeremiah,
others to Zerubabel),<note place='foot'>See Ibn Ezra, quoting
Saadia; Ewald and Giesebrecht, commentaries;
Sellin: <hi rend='italic'>Serubabel</hi>, 96 f., 144 f.; also
Davidson, l. c., p. 356-398.</note> or whether the poet had in mind only
the tragic fate of Israel, as many modern exegetes think;
in any case he conceived the unique and pathetic picture of
Israel as the suffering Servant of the Lord, who is at last to
be exalted:<note place='foot'>Isa. LII, 13-LIII, 12. In
LIII, 9, we should read <q>the evil-doers</q> instead
of <q>the rich</q> by a slight amendment of the text.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>Behold, My servant shall prosper, he shall be exalted
and lifted up, and shall be very high. According as many
were appalled at thee&mdash;so marred was his visage unlike that
of a man, and his form unlike that of the sons of men&mdash;so
shall he startle many nations; kings shall shut their mouths
because of him; for that which had not been told them they
shall see, and that which they had not heard shall they perceive.
Who would have believed our report? And to whom
hath the arm of the Lord been revealed? For he shot up
right forth as a sapling, and as a root out of a dry ground;
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
he had no form nor comeliness, that we should look upon
him, nor beauty that we should delight in him. He was
despised and forsaken of men, a man of pains, and acquainted
with disease, and as one from whom men hide their face;
he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely our diseases
he did bear, and our pains he carried; whereas we
did esteem him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted. But
he was wounded because of our transgressions, he was crushed
because of our iniquities; the chastisement of our welfare
was upon him, and with his stripes we were healed. All we,
like sheep, did go astray, we turned every one to his own way;
and the Lord hath made to light on him the iniquity of us
all. He was oppressed, though he humbled himself, and
opened not his mouth; as a lamb that is led to the slaughter,
and as a sheep that before her shearers is dumb; yea, he
opened not his mouth. By oppression and judgment he
was taken away, and with his generation who did reason?
For he was cut off out of the land of the living, for the transgression
of my people to whom the stroke was due. And
they made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich his
tomb; although he had done no violence, neither was any
deceit in his mouth. Yet it pleased the Lord to crush him
by disease; to see if his soul would offer itself in restitution,
that he might see his seed, prolong his days, and that the
purpose of the Lord might prosper by his hand. Of the travail
of his soul he shall see to the full, even My servant, who
by his knowledge did justify the Righteous One to the many,
and their iniquities he did bear. Therefore will I divide
him a portion among the great, and he shall divide his soul
with the mighty; because he bared his soul unto death, and
was numbered with the transgressors; yet he bore the sin
of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. Whatever be the historical background of this great
elegy, our seer uses it to portray Israel as the tragic hero
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>
of the world's history. His prophetic genius possessed a
unique insight into the character and destiny of his people,
seeing Israel as a man of woe and grief, chosen by Providence
to undergo unheard-of trials for a great cause, by which, at
the last, he is to be exalted. Bent and disfigured by his
burden of misery and shame, shunned and abhorred as one
laden with sin, he suffers for no guilt of his own. He is called
to testify to his God among all the peoples, and is thus the
<emph>Servant of the Lord</emph>, the atoning sacrifice for the sins of mankind,
from whose bruises healing is to come to all the nations,&mdash;an
inimitable picture of a self-sacrificing hero, whose death
means life to the world and glory to God, and who will at last
live forever with the Lord whom he has served so steadfastly.
Our seer mentions in earlier passages the Servant of the
Lord who <q>gave his back to the smiters, and his cheeks to
them that plucked off the hair; and hid not his face from
shame and spitting.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. L, 6.</note>
Yet <q>he shall set his face like a flint,</q>
so that <q>he shall not fail nor be crushed, till he have set the
right in the earth; and the isles shall wait for his
teaching.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XLII, 4.</note>
Still more directly, he says: <q>And He said unto Me, <q>Thou
art My servant, Israel, in whom I will be glorified.</q> ... It
is too light a thing that thou shouldest be My servant to raise
up the tribes of Jacob and to restore the offspring of Israel;
I will also give thee for a light of the nations, that My salvation
may be unto the end of the earth. Thus saith the Lord,
the Redeemer of Israel, his Holy One, to him who is despised
of men, to him who is abhorred of nations, to a servant of
rulers: kings shall see and arise, princes, and they shall
prostrate themselves; because of the Lord that is faithful,
even the Holy One of Israel, who hath chosen thee.</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
XLIX, 1-6.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. It was, however, no easy matter for men reared in the
old view to reach the lofty conception of a suffering hero.
Even the dramatic figure of Job seemed to lack the right
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
solution. Job protests his guiltlessness, defies the dark power
of fate, and even challenges divine justice, but God himself
announces at the end that no man can grasp the essence of
His plan for the world. A later and more naïve writer,
who added the conclusion of the book, reversed Job's destiny
and compensated him by a double share of what he had lost
in both wealth and family.<note place='foot'>Job XLII, 10-17.</note> As if the great
problem of suffering could be solved by such external means! Neither
would the problem of the great tragedy of Israel, the martyr-priest
of the centuries, the Job of the nations, ever find its
solution in a national restoration. A mere political rebirth
could never compensate for the thousandfold death and
untold woe of the Jew for his God and his faith! But the
people at large could not grasp such a conception as is that
of Deutero-Isaiah's of the mission of Israel to be the suffering
servant of the Lord, the witness of God&mdash;which is <q>martyr</q>
in the Greek version,&mdash;the redeemer of the nations.
They were eager to return to Palestine, to rebuild State and
Temple under the leadership of the heir to the throne of
David. But when their hope had failed that Zerubbabel
would prove to be the <q>shoot of Jesse,</q><note place='foot'>The
disappointment is especially voiced in Ps. LXXX, 16 f.; LXXIX,
40-46.</note> the prophetic elegy
was referred to the Messiah, and the belief gained ground
that he would have to suffer before he would triumph.<note place='foot'>See
Targum and Abravanel to Isa. LII, 13; comp. Pes. R. XXXVI-XXXVII;
Sanh. 98 b.</note>
Thus many a pseudo-Messiah fell a victim to the tyranny
of Rome in both Judæa and Samaria,&mdash;for the Samaritans
also hoped for a Messiah, a redeemer of the type of Moses.<note place='foot'>He
is called Taeb <q>Moses redivivus,</q> after Deut. XVIII, 18. Merk, E.
<hi rend='italic'>Samarit. Fragment ueb. d. Taeb</hi>. See Bousset, l. c.,
258; J. E., art. Samaritans.</note>
Finally a belief arose that there would be two Messiahs,
one of the house of Joseph, that is, the tribe of Ephraim,
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
who would fall before the sword of the enemy,<note place='foot'>Suk.
52 a; Jellinek: B. H. III, 141 f; Schuerer, l. c., II, 535.</note> and the other
of the house of David, who was to conquer the heathen
nations and establish his throne forever.<note place='foot'>J. E., art. Messiah.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Church referred the pathetic figure of the man of sorrow
to her crucified Messiah or Christ. Yet he who was
to be a world-savior bore through his followers damnation to
his own kinsmen, and thus was rendered the chief cause of
the persecution of the martyr-race of Israel.
</p>

<p>
6. We learn, however, from Origen, a Church father of
the third century, that Jewish scholars, in a controversy with
him, expressed the view that the Servant of the Lord refers
to the Jewish people, which, dispersed among the nations and
universally despised, would finally obtain the ascendancy
over them, so that many of the heathen would espouse
the Jewish faith.<note place='foot'>Contra Celsum
I, 155.</note> Most of the medieval Jewish exegetes,
including Rashi, who usually follows the traditional view,
refer the chapter likewise to the Jewish people. As a matter
of fact, the earlier chapters which speak of the Servant of
the Lord can have no other meaning, while many points in
the description of the suffering hero, especially the reference
to his seed after his death, do not fit the Nazarene at all.
Hence all independent Christian scholars to-day have abandoned
the tradition of the Church, and admit that Israel
alone is declared by the prophet to be the one singled out by
God to atone for the sins of the nations, to arouse all humanity
to a deeper spiritual vision, and finally to triumph
over all the heathen world.<note place='foot'>See commentaries
of Cheyne, Duhm, Giesebrecht, and others.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. Thus the strange history of the martyr people is put
in the right light and the great tragedy of Israel explained.
Israel is the champion of the Lord, chosen to battle and suffer
for the supreme values of mankind, for freedom and justice,
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
truth and humanity; the man of woe and grief, whose blood
is to fertilize the soil with the seeds of righteousness and love
for mankind. From the days of Pharaoh to the present
day, every oppressor of the Jews has become the means of
bringing greater liberty to a wider circle; for the God of
Israel, the Hater of bondage, has been appealed to in behalf
of freedom in the old world and the new. Every hardship
that made life unbearable to the Jew became a road to humanity's
triumph over barbarism. All the injustice and malice
which hurled their bitter shafts against Israel, the Pariah of
the nations, led ultimately to the greater victory of right
and love. So all the dark waves of hatred and fanaticism
that beat against the Jewish people served only to impress
the truth of monotheism, coupled with sincere love of God and
man, more deeply upon all hearts and to consign hypocrisy
and falsehood to eternal contempt. Such is the belief confidently
held by the people of God, and ever confirmed anew
by the history of the ages. <q>He is near that justifieth me;
who will contend with me? let us stand up together; who is
mine adversary? let him come near to me. Behold, the
Lord God will help me; who is he that shall condemn me?</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
L, 8-9.</note>
Thus speaks the Servant of the Lord, certain that he will
finally triumph, because he defends God's cause, and is bound
indissolubly to Him.<note place='foot'>Comp. Pesik. 131 b;
Ex. R. II, 7.</note> Indeed, God says of him: <q>Surely,
he that toucheth you toucheth the apple of Mine (his) eye.</q><note place='foot'>Zech.
II, 12. See Geiger: <hi rend='italic'>Urschrift</hi>, 324, as
to the Soferic Emendation.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. The great importance which the rabbis attached to
Israel's martyrdom is shown by the following remarks in
connection with the laws of sacrifice: <q>Behold, how the
Torah selects for the sacrificial altar only such animals as
belong to the pursued, not the pursuers: the ox which is
pursued by the lion; the lamb which is pursued by the wolf;
the goat which is pursued by the panther, but none of those
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
which feed on prey. In like manner God chose for His own
the persecuted ones: Abel, who was persecuted by his brother
Cain; Noah, who was derided by the generation of the flood;
Abraham, who had to flee before the tyrant Nimrod; and
Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, who met with unkindness from
their own brothers. In the same way God has chosen Israel
from among the seventy nations, as the lamb hunted, as
it were, by seventy wolves, that it should bear His law to
mankind.</q><note place='foot'>Pesik. 76 a; Eccl. R.
III, 19; Lev. R. XXVII, 5.</note> This idea is expressed also in the Haggadic
saying: <q>Those shall be privileged to see the majesty of
God in full splendor who meet humiliation, but do not humiliate
others; who bear insult, but do not inflict it on others;
and who endure a life of martyrdom in pure love of
God.</q><note place='foot'>Yoma 23 a, referring to Jud. V, 31.</note>
</p>

<p>
Indeed, the medieval Jew accepted his sad lot in this
spirit of resignation. But the modern Jew is in a different
situation. In the mighty effort of our age for higher truth,
broader love and larger justice, he beholds the nearing of the
prophetic goal of a united humanity, based on the belief
in God, the King and Father of all. Accordingly, modern
Judaism proclaims more insistently than ever that the Jewish
people is the Servant of the Lord, the suffering Messiah of
the nations, who offered his life as an atoning sacrifice for
humanity and furnished his blood as the cement with which
to build the divine kingdom of truth and justice. Indeed,
the cosmopolitan spirit of the Jew is the one element needed
for the universality of culture. On the other hand, the world
at large is to-day learning more and more to regard the superb
loyalty of the Jew to his ancestral faith with greater fairness
and admiration and to accord larger appreciation to him and
his religion. Once the flood of hatred, dissension, and prejudice
that brought such untold havoc shall have disappeared
from the earth; once religion emerges from the nebulous
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
atmosphere of other-worldliness, and directs its longing for
God toward a life of godliness on earth in the spirit of the
ancient prophets, then the historic mission of the Jew will
also be better understood. Israel, the hunted dove, which
found no resting-place for the sole of its foot during the flood
of sin and persecution, will then appear with the olive-branch
of peace for all humanity, to open the hearts of men that all
may enter the covenant with the universal Father. Then,
and not till then, will the shame of those thousands of years
be rolled away, when the world will recognize that not <emph>a</emph>
Jew, but <emph>the</emph> Jew has been the suffering Messiah, and that he
was sent forth to be the savior of the nations.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_LIII'/>
<head>Chapter LIII. The Messianic Hope</head>

<p>
1. Recent investigators have brought to light many a
vision of an era of heavenly bliss brought about by some
powerful ruler, voiced in hoary antiquity by seer or singer in
addressing the royal masters of Babylon or
Egypt.<note place='foot'>See Gressmann: <hi rend='italic'>Urspr. d. israel. u.
jued. Eschatologie</hi>,&mdash;an instructive work,
but full of unsubstantiated assertions, thus failing to do justice to the creative
genius of the Jewish prophets.</note> But no
word in the entire vocabulary of ancient poetry or prose can
so touch the deeper chords of the heart, and so voice the
highest hopes of mankind, as does the name
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Messiah</foreign> (<q>God's
anointed</q>). From a simple title for any of the kings of
Israel, it grew in meaning until it comprised the highest
hopes of the nation. The Jewish vision of the future was
not the twilight of the gods, which meant the end of the
world with its deities, but the dawn of a new world, bright
with the knowledge of God and blessed by the brotherhood
of man. This, the Messianic ideal, is the creation of the
prophetic genius of Israel, and in turn it influenced man's
conception of God, lifting Him out of the national bounds,
and making Him the God of humanity, Ruler of history.
Israel's Messianic hope has become the motive power of
civilization. In the time of deepest national humiliation
it gave the prophets their power to surmount the present
and soar to heights of vision; through it the Jewish people
attained their strength to resist oppression, buoyed up by
perfect confidence and sublime hope. At the same time
its magic luster captivated the non-Jewish nations, spurring
them on to mighty deeds. Thus it has actually conquered
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
the whole world of man. With every step in culture it
points forward to higher aims, still unattained; it promises
to lead mankind, united in God, the Only One, to truth and
justice, righteousness and love. As the banner of Israel, the
Messiah of the nations, it is destined to become the lode-star
of all nations and all religions. This is the kernel of
the Jewish doctrine concerning the Messiah.
</p>

<p>
2. This Messianic hope, on closer analysis, reveals two
elements, both of prophetic origin: one national, the other
religious and universal. The latter is the logical outcome
of the monotheism of the great exilic seer, who based his
stirring pictures of the glorious future of Israel upon the all-encompassing
knowledge of God possessed by the Chosen
People. The classic expression of this hope appears in
Isaiah II, 1-4, and Micah IV, 1-14: <q>And it shall come to
pass in the end of days, that the mountain of the Lord's
house shall be established as the top of the mountains, and
shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow
unto it. And many peoples shall go and say: <q>Come ye
and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house
of the God of Jacob; and He will teach us of His ways, and
we will walk in His paths,</q> for out of Zion shall go forth the
law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And He shall
judge between the nations, and shall decide for many peoples;
and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and
their spears into pruning-hooks; nation shall not lift up
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.</q>
We note, indeed, that no reference to the Messiah or a king
of the house of David appears either in this passage or any
of the prophecies of Deutero-Isaiah. Justice and peace for
all humanity are expected through the reign of God alone.
The specific Messianic character of this prophecy took shape
only in its association with the older national hope, voiced
by the prophet Isaiah.
</p>

<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>

<p>
3. The real Messianic hope involved the reëstablishment
of the throne of David, and was expressed most perfectly
in the words of Isaiah: <q>And there shall come forth a shoot
out of the stock of Jesse, and a twig shall grow forth out of
his roots. And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him,
the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel
and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the
Lord. And his delight shall be in the fear of the Lord; and
he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither decide
after the hearing of his ears; but with righteousness shall
he judge the poor, and decide with equity for the meek of
the land; and he shall smite the land with the rod of his
mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.
And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness
the girdle of his reins. And the wolf shall dwell with
the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and
the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a
little child shall lead them.... They shall not hurt nor
destroy in all My holy mountain; for the earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
sea.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XI, 1-8.</note>
</p>

<p>
This pattern of the ideal ruler may have been modeled
after some ancient Babylonian formula for the adoration of
kings, as has been asserted of late; and the same may be
true of the mystic titles given by Isaiah to the royal heir:
<q>Wonderful counselor, divine hero, father of spoil, prince
of peace.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. IX, 5; the note in the
new Jewish translation takes the words in a
different sense.</note> When the little kingdom of Judæa fell, the
prospect of a realization of the great prophetic vision seemed
gone forever. Therefore the exiles in Babylon fastened their
hopes so much more firmly on the <q>Shoot,</q> particularly on
Zerubabel (<q>the seed born in Babylon</q>), the object of the
<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>
fondest hopes of the later prophets.<note place='foot'>Jer.
XXIII, 5; XXXIII, 15; Zech. III, 8; VI, 12; see Sellin. l. c.
Compare Ps. LXXX, 16 f.; LXXXIV, 10; LXXXIX, 39, 52; CXXX, 10;
see Ewald's commentary.</note> When he, too, disappointed
their expectations, probably due to Persian interference,
they transferred the advent of the Messiah more
and more into the realm of miracle, and popular fancy dwelt
fondly on his appearance as God's champion against the
hosts of heathendom (Gog and Magog).<note place='foot'>Ezek.
XXXVIII-XXXIX; Sibyll. III, 663; J. E., art. Gog u. Magog;
Bousset, l. c., 231 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. The conception of the priest-prophet Ezekiel is very
significant in this connection; for him the kingdom of Israel's
God could only be established by the restoration of the
throne of David, the servant of the Lord, and by the utter
destruction of the hosts of heathendom, who were hostile to
both God and Israel. In accordance with this hope the
author of the second Psalm presents a dramatic picture of
the Messiah triumphing over the heathen nations, a picture
which became typical for all the future. <q>Why are the
nations in an uproar? And why do the peoples mutter in
vain? The kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take
counsel together against the Lord, and against His anointed:
<q>Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords
from us.</q> He that sitteth in heaven laugheth, the Lord hath
them in derision. Then will He speak unto them in His
wrath, and affright them in His sore displeasure: <q>Truly
it is I that have established My king upon Zion, My holy
mountain.</q> I will tell of the decree: The Lord said unto me:
<q>Thou art My son, this day have I begotten thee. Ask of
Me, and I will give the nations for thine inheritance, and
the ends of the earth for thy possession. Thou shalt break
them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces
like a potter's vessel.</q></q> Henceforth the conception of
the Messiah alternated between Isaiah's prince of peace
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
and the world-conqueror of the Psalmist.<note place='foot'>For
the prince of peace, see, for example, Zech. IX, 9.</note> The name Messiah
does not occur in Scripture in the absolute form, but always
occurs in the construct with JHVH or a pronoun, signifying
<q>the Anointed of the Lord.</q> Accordingly, it expresses the
relation of the Anointed to God, his sovereign, in striking
contrast to the heathen kings who themselves claimed adoration
as gods. The very name Messiah excludes the possibility
of deification. The term Messiah was used with the
article only in much later times, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>ha Meshiah</foreign>,
or in the Aramaic,
<foreign rend='italic'>Meshiha</foreign>, from which we derive the name, Messiah.
</p>

<p>
5. In the course of time, however, as the people waited in
vain for a redeemer, the expected Messiah was lifted more
and more into the realm of the ideal. The belief took hold
especially in the inner circle of the pious (Hasidim) that the
Messiah was hidden somewhere, protected by God, to appear
miraculously after having vanquished the hostile powers.
The Essenes, the representatives of the secret lore, developed
this conception in the Apocalyptic writings, thus giving the
Messiah a certain cosmic or supernatural character. They
probably modeled their thoughts upon the Zoroastrian
system, where <foreign rend='italic'>Soshiosh</foreign>, the world savior, would appear in
the last millennium as the messenger of Ormuzd to destroy
forever the kingdom of evil and establish the dominion of
the good.<note place='foot'>See Bousset, l. c., 255-261.</note>
Thus, when Isaiah says of the Messiah that
<q>by the breath of his mouth he shall slay the wicked,</q> this
is referred to the principle of evil, Satan or Belial, who was
sometimes actually identified with the Persian Ahriman.<note place='foot'>See
Targum to Isa. XI, 4, where the older Mss. read Arimalyus, later on
corrupted into Armillus. See Bousset, l. c., 589.</note>
Moreover, after the Persian system, the whole process of
history was divided into six millenniums of strife between
the principle of good and evil, represented by the Torah
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
and the ungodliness of the world, and a seventh millennium,
the kingdom of God or the Messianic age. The dates of
these were calculated upon the basis of the book of Daniel,
with its four world-kingdoms and mysterious
numbers.<note place='foot'>Dan. II; VII; IX; see J. E., art. Eschatology.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. The Biblical passages which refer to <q>the end of days</q>
were also connected with the advent of the Messianic age,
and the so-called eschatological writings speak of fixed periods
following one another. In accordance with certain prophetic
hints, they expected first the <q>birth-throes</q><note place='foot'>Sota
IX, 15; Enoch XCIX, 4; C, 1; Matt. XXIV, 8; Bousset,
l. c., 286.</note> or <q>vestiges</q>
of the Messianic age, a great physical and moral crisis with
the turmoil of nature, plagues, and moral degeneracy. Before
the Messiah would suddenly appear from his hiding place,
the prophet Elijah was to return from heaven, whither he
had ascended in a fiery chariot. But, while he had lived
in implacable wrath against idolaters, he was now to come
as a messenger of peace, reconciling the hearts of Israel with
God and with one another, preparing the way to repentance,
and thus to the redemption and reunion of Israel.<note place='foot'>Mal.
III, 23; B. Sira XLVIII, 10 f.; Sibyll. II, 187.</note> The
next stage is the gathering together of Israel from all corners
of the earth to the holy land under the leadership of the
Messiah, summoned by the blast of the heavenly trumpet.<note place='foot'>Isa.
XXVII, 13; B. Sira XXXVI, 13; Tobit XIII, 13; Enoch XC, 32;
II Macc. II, 18; Bousset, l. c., 271.</note>
Then begins that gigantic warfare on the holy soil between
the hosts of Israel and the vast forces of heathendom led
by the half-mystic powers of Gog and Magog, a conflict
which, according to Ezekiel, is to last for seven years and
to end with the annihilation of the powers of evil. Before
the real Messiah, the son of David, appears in victory, another
Messiah of the tribe of Ephraim is to fall in battle, according
to a belief dating from the second century and possibly connected
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
with the Bar Kochba war.<note place='foot'>See Chap.
<ref target='Chapter_LII'>LII</ref>.</note> In another tradition,
probably older, the true Messiah himself is to suffer and
die.<note place='foot'>IV Ezra VIII, 28.</note>
At all events, he must destroy Rome, the fourth world-kingdom.
But he is also to slay the arch-fiend Ahriman,
afterwards known as Armillus. Moreover, he will redeem
the dead from Sheol, as he possesses the key to open all the
graves of the holy land, and thus all the sons of Israel will
partake in the glory of his kingdom. Then at last the city
of Jerusalem will arise in splendor, built of gold and precious
stones, the marvel of the world, and in its midst the Temple,
a structure of surpassing magnificence. The holy vessels
of the tabernacle, hidden for ages in the wilderness, will
appear, and the nations will offer the wealth of the whole
earth as their tribute to the Messiah. All will practice
righteousness and piety, and will be rewarded by bliss and
numerous posterity.<note place='foot'>Sanh. 96 f.; J. E.,
art. Eschatology; Bousset, l. c.</note>
</p>

<p>
Opinions differ widely as to the duration of the Messianic
age. They range from forty to four hundred years, and
again from three generations to a full millennium.<note place='foot'>Sanh.
97 a, b, 99.</note> This
difference is partly caused by the distinction between the
national hope, with the temporary welfare of the people of
Israel, and the religious hope concerning the divine kingdom,
which is to last forever. A very late rabbinic belief holds
that the Messiah will be able to give a new law and even to
abrogate Mosaic prohibitions.<note place='foot'>Midr.
Teh. Ps. CXLVI, 4; see Buber's note.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. At any rate, no complete system of eschatology existed
during the Talmudic age, as the views of the various apocalyptic
writers were influenced by the changing events of
the time and the new environments, with their constant
influence upon popular belief. A certain uniformity, indeed,
existed in the fundamental ideas. The Messianic hope in
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
its national character includes always the reunion of all
Israel under a victorious ruler of the house of David, who
shall destroy all hostile powers and bring an era of supreme
prosperity and happiness as well as of peace and good-will
among men. The Haggadists indulged also in dreams of
the marvelous fertility of the soil of Palestine in the Messianic
time,<note place='foot'>Ket. 111-112; comp. Irenæus: Adver.
Haeres. V, 32.</note> and of the resurrection of the dead in the holy land.
But in Judaism such views could never become dogmas, as
they did in the Church, even though they were common in
both the older and younger Haggadah. These national
expectations were expressed in the liturgy by the Eighteen
Benedictions, composed by the founders of the Synagogue,
the so-called Men of the Great Synagogue; here the prayers
for <q>the gathering of the dispersed</q> and the <q>destruction
of the kingdom of Insolence</q> precede those for the <q>rebuilding
of Jerusalem and the restoration of the throne of
David.</q> But the mystic speculations on the origin, activity,
and sojourn of the Messiah, which were a favorite theme of
the apocalyptic writers and the Haggadists during the pre-Christian
and the first Christian centuries, gave way to a
more sober mode of thought, in the disappointment that
followed the collapse of the great Messianic movements.
On the one hand, the Church deified its Messiah and thus
relapsed into paganism; on the other, Bar Kochba, <q>the
son of the star,</q> whom the leading Jewish masters of the
law actually considered the Messiah who would free them
from Rome, proved to be a <q>star of ill-luck</q> to the Jewish
people.<note place='foot'>See Ekah. R. II, 2; J. E., art.
Bar Kokba.</note> <q>Like one who wanders in the dark night, now
and then kindling a light to brighten up his path, only to
have it again and again extinguished by the wind, until at
last he resolves to wait patiently for the break of day when
he will no longer require a light,</q> so were the people of Israel
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
with their would-be deliverers, who appeared from time to
time to delude their hopes, until they exclaimed at last:
<q>In Thy light alone, O Lord, we behold light.</q><note place='foot'>Pesik.
144 a, b.</note> Samuel
the Babylonian, of the third century, in opposition to the
Messianic visionaries of his time, declared: <q>The Messianic
age differs from the present in nothing except that Israel
will throw off the yoke of the nations and regain its political
independence.</q><note place='foot'>Ber. 34 b.</note> Another sage said: <q>May the curse
of heaven fall upon those who calculate the date of the advent
of the Messiah and thus create political and social unrest
among the people!</q><note place='foot'>Sanh. 97 b.</note> A third declared: <q>The
Messiah will appear when nobody expects him.</q><note place='foot'>Sanh. 97 a.</note>
Most remarkable of all is the bold utterance of Rabbi Hillel of the fourth
century, a lineal descendant of the great master Hillel and
the originator of the present Jewish calendar system. In all
likelihood many of his contemporaries were busy calculating
the advent of the Messianic time according to the number
of Jubilees in the world-eras, whereupon he said: <q>Israel
need not await the advent of the Messiah, as Isaiah's prophecy
was fulfilled by the appearance of King Hezekiah.</q><note place='foot'>Sanh. 98 b.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. Throughout the Middle Ages, when the political or
national hopes rose high, we find various Messianic movements
in both East and West revived by religious aspirations.
But Maimonides, the great rationalist, in his commentary
on the Mishnah and in his Code, formulated a Messianic
belief which was quite free from mystical and supernatural
elements. His twelfth article of faith declares that <q>the
Jew, unless he wishes to forfeit his claim to eternal life by
denial of his faith, must, in acceptance of the teachings of
Moses and the prophets down to Malachi, believe that the
Messiah will issue forth from the house of David in the
person of a descendant of Solomon, the only legitimate king;
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
and he shall far excel all rulers in history by his reign, glorious
in justice and peace. Neither impatience nor deceptive
calculation of the time of the advent of the Messiah should
shatter this belief. Still, notwithstanding the majesty and
wisdom of the Messiah, he must be regarded as a mortal
being like any other and only as the restorer of the Davidic
dynasty. He will die and leave a son as his successor, who
will in his turn die and leave the throne to his heir. Nor will
there be any material change in the order of things in the
whole system of nature and human life; accordingly Isaiah's
picture of the living together of lamb and wolf cannot be
taken literally, nor any of the Haggadic sayings with reference
to the Messianic time. We are only to believe in the
coming of Elijah as a messenger of peace and the forerunner
of the Messiah, and also in the great decisive battle with
the hosts of heathendom embodied in Gog and Magog,
through whose defeat the dominion of the Messiah will be
permanently established.</q> <q>The Messianic kingdom itself,</q>
continues Maimonides with reference to the utterance of
Samuel quoted above, <q>is to bring the Jewish nation its
political independence, but not the subjection of all the heathen
nations, nor merely material prosperity and sensual pleasure,
but an era of general affluence and peace, enabling the Jewish
people to devote their lives without care or anxiety to the
study of the Torah and universal wisdom, so that by their
teachings they may lead all mankind to the knowledge of
God and make them also share in the eternal bliss of the
world to come.</q><note place='foot'>Commentary to San. X; Yad,
H. <hi rend='italic'>Melakim</hi>, XI-XII; <hi rend='italic'>H. Teshubah</hi>
VIII-IX.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. Against this rationalized hope for the Messiah, which
merges the national expectation into the universal hope for
the kingdom of God, strong objections were raised by Abraham
ben David of Posquieres, the mystic, a fierce opponent
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
of Maimonides, who referred to various Biblical and Talmudical
passages in contradiction to this view.<note place='foot'>Notes
of R. A. B. D. to Maimuni.</note> On the
other hand, Joseph Albo, the popular philosopher, who was
trained by his public debates against the representatives of
the Church, emphasized especially the rational character
of the Jewish theology, and declared that the Messianic hope
cannot be counted among the fundamental doctrines of
Judaism, or else Rabbi Hillel could never have rejected
it so boldly.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ikkarim</hi>, IV, 42.</note>
</p>

<p>
On this point we must consider the fine observation of
Rashi that Hillel denied only a personal Messiah, but not
the coming of a Messianic age, assuming that God himself
will redeem Israel and be acknowledged everywhere as Ruler
of the world. As a matter of fact, too much difference of
opinion existed among the Tanaim and Amoraim on the
personality of the Messiah and the duration of his reign to
admit of a definite article of faith on the question. The
expected Messiah, the heir of the Davidic throne, naturally
embodied the national hope of the Jewish people in their
dispersion, when all looked to Palestine as their land and
to Jerusalem as their political center and rallying point in
days to come. Traditional Judaism, awaiting the restoration
of the Mosaic sacrificial cult as the condition for the return
of the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shekinah</foreign>
to Zion, was bound to persist in its belief
in a personal Messiah who would restore the Temple and
its service.
</p>

<p>
10. A complete change in the religious aspiration of the
Jew was brought about by the transformation of his political
status and hopes in the nineteenth century. The new era
witnessed his admission in many lands to full citizenship on an
equality with his fellow-citizens of other faiths. He was no
longer distinguished from them in his manner of speech and
dress, nor in his mode of education and thought; he therefore
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
necessarily identified himself completely with the nation
whose language and literature had nurtured his mind, and
whose political and social destinies he shared with true patriotic
fervor. He stood apart from the rest only by virtue
of his religion, the great spiritual heritage of his hoary past.
Consequently the hope voiced in the Synagogal liturgy for
a return to Palestine, the formation of a Jewish State under
a king of the house of David, and the restoration of the sacrificial
cult, no longer expressed the views of the Jew in Western
civilization. The prayer for the rebuilding of Jerusalem
and the restoration of the Temple with its priestly cult could
no longer voice his religious hope. Thus the leaders of
Reform Judaism in the middle of the nineteenth century
declared themselves unanimously opposed to retaining the
belief in a personal Messiah and the political restoration of
Israel, either in doctrine or in their liturgy.<note place='foot'>See
Philipson: <hi rend='italic'>The Reform Movement in Judaism</hi>, 246
f.</note> They accentuated all the more strongly Israel's hope for a Messianic
age, a time of universal knowledge of God and love of man,
so intimately interwoven with the religious mission of the
Jewish people. Harking back to the suffering Servant of
the Lord in Deutero-Isaiah, they transferred the title of
Messiah to the Jewish nation. Reform Judaism has thus
accepted the belief that Israel, the suffering Messiah of the
centuries, shall at the end of days become the triumphant
Messiah of the nations.<note place='foot'>See Einhorn: Sinai
I, 133; Leopold Stein: <hi rend='italic'>Schrift des Lebens</hi>, 320, 336.
For the term Messiah comp. Ps. LV, 15; Hab. III, 13; also Ps. XXVIII,
8; LXXXIV, 10; LXXXIX, 39, 52.</note>
</p>

<p>
11. This view taken by reform Judaism is the logical outcome
of the political and social emancipation of the Jew in
western Europe and America. Naturally, it had no appeal
to the Jew in the Eastern lands, where he was kept apart by
mental training, social habits and the discrimination of the
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
law, so that he regarded himself as a member of a different
nationality in every sense. Palestine remained the object
of his hope and longing in both his social and religious life.
When modern ideas of life began to transform the religious
views and habits in many a quarter, and terrible persecutions
again aroused the longing of the unfortunate sufferers for a
return to the land of their fathers, the term Zionism was
coined, and the movement rapidly spread. It expressed the
purely national aims of the Jewish people, disregarding the
religious aspirations always heretofore connected with the
Messianic hope. This term has since become the watchword
of all those who hope for a political restoration of the Jewish
people on Palestinian soil, as well as of others whose longings
are of a more cultural nature. Both regard the Jewish people
as a nation like any other, denying to it the specific character
of a priest-people and a holy nation with a religious mission
for humanity, which has been assigned to it at the very
beginning of its history and has served to preserve it through
the centuries. On this account Zionism, whether political
or cultural, can have no place in Jewish theology. Quite
different is the attitude of religious Zionism which emphasizes
the ancient hopes and longings for the restoration of the
Jewish Temple and State in connection with the nationalistic
movement.
</p>

<p>
12. Political Zionism owes its origin to the wave of Anti-Semitism
which rose as a counter-movement to the emancipation
of the Jew, that alienated many of the household of
Israel from their religion. Thus it has the merit of awakening
many Jews upon whom the ancestral faith had lost its
hold to a sense of love and loyalty to the Jewish past. In
many it has aroused a laudable zeal for the study of Jewish
history and literature, which should bring them a deeper
insight into, and closer identification with, the historic character
of Israel, the suffering Messiah of the nations, and
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
thus in time transform the national Jew into a religious Jew.
The study of Israel's mighty past will, it is hoped, bring to
them the conviction that the power, the hope and the refuge
of Israel is in its God, and not in any territorial possession.
We require a regeneration, not of the nation, but of the
faith of Israel, which is its soul.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_LIV'/>
<head>Chapter LIV. Resurrection, a National Hope</head>

<p>
1. The Jewish belief in resurrection is intimately bound
up with the hope for the restoration of the Israelitish nation
on its own soil, and consequently rather national; indeed,
originally purely local and territorial.<note place='foot'>See
J. E., art. Resurrection.</note> True, the rabbis
justified their belief in resurrection by such Scriptural verses
as: <q>I kill and I make alive</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XXXII,
39; see Sifre ad loc.</note> and <q>The Lord killeth, and
maketh alive; He bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth
up.</q><note place='foot'>I Sam. II, 6; see Midr. Sh'muel,
ad loc.</note> Founded on such passages, the belief would have to
include all men, and could be confined neither to the Jewish
people nor to the land of Judea. However, we find no trace
of such a belief in the entire Bible save for two late post-exilic
passages<note place='foot'>Isa. XXVI, 19; Dan. XII, 2.</note>
which are in fact apocalyptic, being based
upon earlier prophecies, and themselves, in turn, basic to
the later dogma of the Pharisees.
</p>

<p>
2. The picture of a resurrection was first drawn by the
prophet Hosea, who applied it to Israel. In his distress
over the destiny of his people he says: <q>Come, and let us
return unto the Lord; for He hath torn, and He will heal
us, He hath smitten, and He will bind us up. After two
days will He revive us, on the third day He will raise us up,
that we may live in His presence.</q><note place='foot'>Hosea
VI, 1-2; comp. XIII, 14.</note> Ezekiel's vision of the
dry bones which rose to a new life under the mighty sway
of the spirit of God,<note place='foot'>Ezek. XXXVII,
1-14.</note> gave more definite shape to the picture,
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
although in the form of allegory. As the prophet himself
says, he aimed to describe the resurrection of Judah and
Israel from their grave of exile. The obscure Messianic
prophecy in Isaiah, chapters XXIV to XXVII, strikes a
new note. First the author deals with the terrible slaughter
which God will inflict upon the heathen, after which <q>He
will swallow up death forever; and the Lord God will wipe
away tears from off all faces; and the reproach of His people
will He take away from off all the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XXV, 8.</note>
Finally, when the oppressors of Israel are completely annihilated, exclaims
the seer: <q>Thy dead shall live, thy dead bodies shall arise&mdash;awake
and sing, ye that dwell in the dust&mdash;for thy dew
is a fructifying dew, and the earth shall bring to life the
shades.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XXVI, 19. Instead of <q>my
dead bodies</q> in the new Bible translation,
read <q>thy dead,</q> and instead of <q>light</q> translate
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>oroth</foreign>, after II Kings IV, 39,
<q>herb,</q> which means <q>dew of revival</q>; the last is also
a rabbinic term.</note> Daniel speaks in a similar vein: <q>And many
of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some
to everlasting life, and some to reproaches and everlasting
abhorrence.</q><note place='foot'>Dan. XII, 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. In this hope for resurrection at the end of days the
leading thought is that the prophecies which have been
unfulfilled during the lifetime of the pious, and particularly
the martyrs, shall be realized in the world to come.<note place='foot'>See
II Macc. VII, 9-36; XII, 43; XIV, 46; Sibyll. II, 47; Midr. Teh.
Ps. XVII, 13.</note> In the
oldest apocalyptic writings this life of the future is still conceived
as earthly bliss, inasmuch as the writers think only
of the Messianic time of national glory, depicted in such
glowing colors by the prophets. Unbounded richness of the
soil and numerous offspring, abundant treasures brought
by remote nations and their rulers, peace and happiness
far and wide&mdash;such are the characteristics of the Messianic
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
age. In order that the dead may share in all this, it is to be
preceded by the resurrection and the great <emph>Day of Judgment</emph>
in the valley of Jehoshaphat or Gehinnom (Gehenna), where
the righteous are to be singled out to participate in the realm
of the Messiah.<note place='foot'>See Joel IV, 2; Erub. 19 a, ref.
to Isa. XXXI., 9; Enoch XXVIII, 1.</note> As a national prospect the Messianic
hope was based upon the passage in Deutero-Isaiah: <q>Thy
people also shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the land
forever.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. LX, 21.</note> Consequently an ancient Mishnah taught
that <q>All Israel shall have a share in the world to come.</q><note place='foot'>Sanh.
X, 1.</note> In fact, the term <q>inherit the land</q> was used as late as the
Mishnah to express the idea of sharing in the future life; so
also in the New Testament, where the resurrection was expected
before the coming of the kingdom of the Messiah.<note place='foot'>Kid.
I, 10; Matt. V, 5, ref. to Ps. XXXVII, 11; Enoch V, 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. The logical assumption was, accordingly, that only
the dead of the holy land should enjoy the resurrection.
The prophetic verses were cited: <q>I will set glory in the
land of the living,</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. XXVI,
20.</note> and <q>He that giveth breath to the people upon it, and
spirit to them that walk therein,</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XLII, 5.</note> and
were interpreted in the sense that God would restore the
breath of life only to those buried in the holy land.<note place='foot'>Keth.
111 a.</note> Likewise the verse of the Psalmist, <q>I shall walk before the Lord
in the land of the living,</q> was referred to Palestine, as the
land where the dead shall awaken to a new life.<note place='foot'>Ps.
CXVI, 9; Yer. Keth. XII, 35 b; Pesik. R, I, 2 b.</note> Hence
the rabbis held the strange belief that when the great heavenly
trumpet is sounded to summon all the tribes of Israel from
the ends of the earth to the holy land,<note place='foot'>Ber.
15 b; Alphabet d. R. Akiba in Jellinek, B. H. III, 31; Targum
Yer. to Ex. XX, 15; I Cor. XV, 52.</note> those who have been
buried outside of Palestine must pass through cavities under
the earth, until they reach the soil where the miracle of the
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
resurrection will be performed.<note place='foot'>Keth. l. c.</note>
It has, therefore, become
a custom of the pious among the Orthodox to this very day,
in case they could not bury the dead in Palestine, to put
dust of the holy land beneath their head, that they might
arise wherever they were buried.
</p>

<p>
5. We may take it for granted that this naïve conception
of the resurrection could not be permanent, and so was
modified to include a double resurrection: the first, national,
to usher in the Messianic kingdom, and the other, universal,
to usher in the everlasting life of the future. The former
offered scant room for the heathen world, at best only for
those who had actually joined the ranks of Judaism; the
latter, however, included the last judgment for all souls
and thus opened the way for the salvation of the righteous
among the nations as well as the people of Israel. At this
point the conception of resurrection led to higher and more
spiritual ideas, as has been shown in Chapter <ref target='Chapter_XLIII'>XLIII</ref>.
</p>

<p>
6. However, the belief in the resurrection of the body,
though expressed in the ancient liturgy, is in such utter
contradiction to our entire attitude toward both science and
religion, that it may be considered obsolete for the modern
Jew. Orthodoxy, which clings to it in formal loyalty to
tradition, regards it as a miracle which God will perform in
the future, exactly like the many Biblical miracles which
defy reason.
</p>

<p>
7. The Zionist movement has given many Jews a new
attitude toward the national resurrection of Israel. The
nationalists expect the Jewish nation to awaken from a
sleep of eighteen hundred years to new greatness in its
ancient home, not as a religious, but as a political body, and
in renouncing all allegiance to the priestly mission of Israel and
its ancestral faith they are as remote from genuine Orthodoxy
as from Reform Judaism. They assert that the soul of the
<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>
Jewish people requires a national body rooted in its ancient
soil in order that it may fulfill its appointed task among the
nations; they even go so far as to declare all the achievements
brought about by the assimilation of the culture of
the surrounding nations to be a deterioration of the genuine
character of the Jewish nation. The fact is that, as in nature
there is nowhere a resurrection of the dead but an ever renewed
regeneration of life, so is the history of the Jew and
of Judaism a continuous process of regeneration manifested
at every great turning-point of history, when the ideas and
cultural elements of a new civilization exert their powerful
influence on life and thought. There never was, nor will be
an exclusively Jewish culture. It is the wondrous power of
assimilation of the Jew which ever created and fashioned
his culture anew. That which constitutes the peculiarity
of the Jew and his life force is his religion fostered through
the ages, preserved amidst the most antagonistic influences
and hostile environments, and ever rejuvenated by its unique
universalistic spirit when revived by contact with kindred
movements. To maintain and propagate this, his religion
in all lands and amidst all civilizations, is the task assigned
to him by Providence, until God's Kingdom has been
established all over the globe.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter LV. Israel and the Heathen Nations</head>

<p>
1. As there is but one Creator and Ruler of the universe,
so there is before Him but one humanity. All the nations are
under His guidance, while Israel, His chosen people, points
to the kingdom of God which is to embrace them all. Israel
was called the <q>first-born son</q> of
God<note place='foot'>Ex. IV, 22.</note> at the very moment
of his election, implying that all the sons of men are His
children. All of them are links in the divine plan of salvation.
In the same sense God spoke through Isaiah: <q>Blessed
be Egypt, My people, and Assyria the work of My hands,
and Israel Mine inheritance.</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
XIX, 25.</note> As the first page of Scripture
assigns a common origin to them all in the first man, so, the
prophets tell us, at the end of time they shall all be filled
with longing for the one God and form with Israel one community
on earth, a great brotherhood of man serving the
common Father above.<note place='foot'>Isa. XLII, 4; XLV, 23;
LI, 5; Zeph. III, 9; Zech. VIII, 22; XIV, 9.</note> Still, the actual world began, not
with the unity, but with the wide diversity and dispersion
of mankind. The idea of the unity of man came as a corollary
to the kindred conception of the unity of God, after a
long historical process.
</p>

<p>
Just as the creation of the world opens with the separation
of light from darkness, so the process of the spiritual and
moral development of mankind begins, according to the
divine plan of salvation, with the separation of Israel from
the heathen nations.<note place='foot'>Lev. XX, 26; Deut. XX,
16-18; comp. Gen. R. II, 4; III, 10.</note> The sharper the contrast became
<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>
between the spiritual God of Israel and the crude sensual
gods of heathendom, the wider grew the chasm between
Judaism and heathenism, between Israel and the nations.
As light is opposed to darkness, so Israel's truth stood opposed
to the idolatry of the nations, until Christianity and
Islam, its daughter-religions, arose between the two extremes.
Henceforth Israel waits with still more confidence
for the age whose dawning will bring the full knowledge of
God to all mankind, leading the world from the night of error
and discord to the noon-day brightness of truth and unity,
when a universal monotheism will make all humanity one.
</p>

<p>
2. Nothing was more remote from ancient Israel than
the hatred of the stranger or hostility to other nations, so
often attributed to it.<note place='foot'>Weber. l. c.,
57-79.</note> In the time of the patriarchs and
under the monarchy, the Hebrews fostered a spirit of friendly
intercourse with their neighbors, which was often confirmed
by peaceful alliances.<note place='foot'>Gen. XIV, 13; XXI,
32.</note> Of course, during war time the spirit
of hostility had full sway, particularly as ancient warfare
imposed a relentless ban upon both booty and human life
among the vanquished. But even then the kings of Israel
were called compassionate also toward their enemies when
compared with other rulers.<note place='foot'>I Kings XX,
31.</note> Indeed, the code of Israel is
distinguished from all other codes of antiquity by mildness
and tender compassion. On the other hand, the God of
justice, revealed through Amos, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Habakkuk,
punishes Israel and the nations impartially on account
of their moral transgressions.<note place='foot'>Amos I-II;
Isa. XXIX-XXXIII; Jer. XXV f.; Hab. I.</note> He avenges acts of treachery,
even when committed against pagan tyrants. <q>Shall not
the Judge of all the earth do justly?</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
XVIII, 25.</note> Such is the recurrent
thought that governs Israel, demanding the same standard
of judgment for Israelite and stranger.
</p>

<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>

<p>
3. The simple sense of justice inherent in the Jewish
people admits so little difference between our own God-consciousness
and that of others, that Scripture represents
the Philistine King Abimelech as receiving a warning from
Abraham's God <foreign lang='he' rend='bold'>JHVH</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Gen.
XX, 3.</note> As the Bible holds up Job, the
Bedouin Sheik, as the pattern of a blameless servant of God
and true lover of mankind,<note place='foot'>Job
XXXI.</note> so the Talmud cites the Philistine
Dama ben Nethina as an example of filial piety.<note place='foot'>Kid. 31 a.</note>
Altogether, the merits of the heathen receive their full measure
of appreciation throughout Jewish literature,<note place='foot'>Tos.
Sanh. XIII, 2; B. B. 10 b.</note> even though a
narrow dissenting view occurs now and then.<note place='foot'>See Lazarus:
<hi rend='italic'>Ethics</hi>, 49 and appendix.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. Still from the very beginning a tendency to relentless
harshness existed in one direction, when the pure worship of
Israel's one and only God was endangered. The early Book of
the Covenant forbade every alliance with idolatrous
nations,<note place='foot'>Ex. XXIII, 32.</note>
and the Deuteronomic Code made this more stringent by
prohibiting intermarriage and even the toleration of idolaters
in the land, lest they seduce the people of God to turn away
from Him.<note place='foot'>Deut. VII, 2; XX, 16 f.</note>
The Pharisean leaders, the founders of Rabbinism,
went still further by placing an interdict upon eating with
the heathen or using food and wine prepared by them, thus
aiming at a complete separation from the non-Jewish
world.<note place='foot'>Shab. 27 b; Jubil. XXII, 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
The contrast between Judaism and heathenism was further
heightened by the view of the prophets and psalmists, showing
that the great nations were the very embodiment of
idolatrous iniquity, murderous violence and sexual impurity,
a world of arrogance and pride, defying God and doomed
to perdition, because they opposed the kingdom of God
proclaimed by Israel.<note place='foot'>Isa. LX, 12;
LXIII, 6; LXVI, 14 f.; Zech. XIV, 2 f.; Joel IV, 9-19;
Jer. X, 25; Ps. IX, 16, 18, 20; X, 17.</note> Henceforth the term <q>the nations</q>
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>goyim</foreign>)
was taken by the religious as meaning the wicked
ones, who would not be able to stand the divine judgment
in the future life, but would go down to Sheol, or Gehenna,
to fall a prey to everlasting corruption, to the fire that is
never quenched.<note place='foot'>Tos. Sanh. XIII, 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. Yet such a wholesale condemnation could not long be
maintained; it was too strongly contradicted in principle
by the prophets and Psalmists, and quite as much by the
apocalyptic writers and Haggadists of later times. The
book of Jonah testifies that Israel's God sent His prophet
to the heathen of Nineveh to exhort them to repentance,
that they might obtain forgiveness and salvation like repentant
Israel.<note place='foot'>Jonah III-IV.</note> Heathenism is doomed to perish, not the
heathen; they are to acknowledge the heavenly Judge in
their very punishments and return to Him. Such is the
conclusion of all the exhortations of the prophets predicting
punishment to the nations. Moreover, those heathen who
escape the doom of the world-powers are to proclaim the
mighty deeds of the Lord to the utmost lands. Nay, according
to the grand vision of the exilic seer, among the
many nations that shall assemble at the end of days to worship
the Lord in Zion, select ones will be admitted to the
priesthood with the sons of Aaron.<note place='foot'>Isa. LXVI,
19-21.</note> The name <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hadrak</foreign>,
understood as <q>he who bringeth back,</q> suggested itself
to the rabbis as a title of the Messiah, the converter of the
heathen nations.<note place='foot'>Zech. IX, 1; Cant. R.
VII, 10.</note> So in both the Talmud and the Sibylline
books<note place='foot'>Sanh. 108 a; Sibyll. I,
129 f.</note> Noah is represented as a preacher of repentance to
the nations before the flood, and accordingly the latter book
adjures the Hellenic world to repent of their sinful lives
before they would be overwhelmed by the flood of fire at the
great judgment day. In the same spirit the Haggadists
tell that God sent Balaam, Job, and other pious men as
<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>
prophets of the heathen to teach them the way of
repentance.<note place='foot'>B. B. 15 b; Seder Olam R. XXI.</note>
And the rabbis actually say that, if the heathen nations had
not refused the Torah when the Lord offered it to them at
Sinai, it would have been the common property of
all mankind.<note place='foot'>Mek. Yithro V; Ab. Z. 2 b-3 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. The leading minds of Judaism felt only pity for the
blind obstinacy of the great mass of heathen, who worshiped
the creatures instead of the Creator, or the stars of heaven
instead of Him who is enthroned above the skies. They
regarded heathenism either as evidence of spiritual want
and weakness, or as the result of destiny. Indeed, the words
of the Deuteronomist sound like an echo of Babylonian
fatalism when he asserts that God himself assigned to the
nations the worship of the stars as their inheritance.<note place='foot'>Deut.
IV, 19; XXIX, 25; Jer. X, 16; B. Sira XVIII, 17; comp.
Bousset, l. c., 350.</note> Later
the opinion gained ground that the heathen deities were real
demons, holding dominion over the nations and leading
them astray.<note place='foot'>Jubil. XI, 3-5; XIX, 20;
Enoch XV; XIX; XCIX, 7; see Bousset, l. c.,
350-351.</note> The exilic seer attacked idolatry most vigorously
as folly and falsehood, and thus the note of derision
and irony is struck by Deutero-Isaiah, the Psalms, and in
many of the propaganda writings of the Hellenistic age, in
their references to heathenism.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, it is very significant that the Palestinian
sages and their successors condemned heathenism as a moral
plague, conducing to depravity, lewdness, and bloodshed.
They regarded the powers of the world, especially Edom
(Rome), as being under the dominion of the Evil One, and
therefore doomed to perish in the flames of Gehenna. As
they rejected the Ten Commandments out of love for bloodshed,
lust, and robbery, so, according to the Haggadists,
they will be unable to withstand the last judgment and will
<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>
suffer eternal punishment. Since their one desire was to
enjoy the life of this world, their lot in the future will be
Gehenna; while the gates of the Garden of Eden will be
open for Israel, the people oppressed and sorely tried, yet
ever faithful to the covenant of Abraham.<note place='foot'>Yeb.
98 a, ref. to Ezek. XXIII, 20; Ab. Z., l. c. In this sense we must
take the Talmudic passage: <q>Israel are really men, not the heathen,</q> Yeb.
61 a; B. M. 114 b; B. B. 16 b; whereas the passage, Lev. XVIII, 5, <q>which
man doth to live thereby,</q> is declared to include all who observe the laws of
humanity, <hi rend='italic'>Sifra</hi> eodem; Midr. Teh. Ps. I, 1-2.</note> Of course,
this view implied both comfort and vengeance, but we must not
forget that the harsh statements contained in the Talmud
owe their origin to bitter distress and cannot be considered
Jewish doctrines, as unfriendly critics frequently do.<note place='foot'>Lazarus,
l. c., 49.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. As has been shown above, the dominant view of the
Synagogue is that eternal salvation belongs to the righteous
among the nations as well as those of Israel. In this sense,
Psalm IX, 18, is understood to the effect that <q>all those
heathens who have forgotten God will go down to the nether
world.</q><note place='foot'>Tos. Sanh. XIII, 2.</note>
One of the sages expresses a still broader view:
<q>When judging the nations, God determines their standard
by their best representatives.</q><note place='foot'>Yer. R.
Sh. I, 57 a.</note> Many rabbis held the
belief that circumcision secured for the Jew a place in <q>Abraham's
bosom</q> while the uncircumcised are consigned to
Gehenna, thus assigning to circumcision a corresponding place
to that of baptism in the Christian Church. This belief
seems to be based upon a passage in Ezekiel, where the
prophet speaks of the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>arelim</foreign>,
or <q>uncircumcised,</q> as dwelling
in the nether world.<note place='foot'>Ezek. XXVIII, 10; XXXI, 18; XXXII, 19-32.
Possibly the prophet in speaking of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>arelim</foreign>
had in mind the Babylonian <foreign rend='italic'>Arallu</foreign>, <q>the
nether-world</q>; see Ex. R. XIX, 5; Gen. R. XL; VIII, 7; Tanh. Lek Leka, ed.
Buber, 27.</note> But a number of passages in the
Talmud, especially in the Tosefta,<note place='foot'>Tos. Sanh.
XIII, 4-5; Rosh ha Shana, 17 a.</note> show that circumcision
was not believed to have the power to save a sinner from
<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>
Gehenna, On the other hand, we have the great teaching
of R. Johanan ben Zakkai in opposing his disciple Eliezer
ben Hyrcanus, telling that the sacrifices which atoned for
the sins of Israel are paralleled by deeds of benevolence,
which can atone for the sins of the heathen.<note place='foot'>B.
B. 10 b; A. d. R. N. IV.</note> Both the
Talmud and Philo state that the seventy bullocks which
were offered up during the seven days of the Feast of Tabernacles
were brought by Israel as sacrifices for the seventy
nations of the world.<note place='foot'>Suk. 55 b;
Pesik. 193 b; Philo; Vita Mosis, 2 f; De Special; I, 3; II,
104, 227. 238.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. Where no cause existed to fear the influence of idolatry,
friendly relations with non-Jews were always recommended
and cultivated. A non-Jew who devotes his life to the study
and practice of the law, said Rabbi Meir, is equal to the high
priest; for Scripture says: <q>The laws which, if a man do,
he shall live by them,</q> implying that pure humanity is the
one essential required by God.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sifra</hi>,
Ahare Moth 13.</note> Indeed, Rabbi Meir enjoyed
a close friendship with Œnomaos of Gadara,<note place='foot'>Gen.
R. L; LXV, 16; Ruth R. I, 8; J. E., art. Œnomaos.</note> a heathen philosopher
spoken of admiringly in Talmudic sources and placed
on a par with Balaam as noble representatives of heathendom.
Obviously this good opinion was held, because both spoke
favorably of Judaism, whose <q>synagogues and schoolhouses
formed the strongest bulwark against the attacks of Jew-haters.</q>
Other friendships which were described in popular
legends and held up as examples for emulation are those between
Jehuda ha Nasi and the Emperor Antoninus (Severus)<note place='foot'>J.
E. art. Antoninus in the Talmud; Kraus: <hi rend='italic'>Antoninus</hi>.</note>
and that of Samuel of Babylonia with Ablat, a
Persian sage.<note place='foot'>Ab. Z. 30 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. The Mosaic and Talmudic law prescribed quite different
treatment for those heathen who persisted in idolatrous
<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>
practices and refused to observe the laws of humanity, called
the seven Noahitic laws, as will be explained more fully
in the next chapter. No toleration could be granted them
within the ancient jurisdiction; <q>Thou shall show them no
mercy</q> was the phrase of the law for the seven tribes of
Canaan, and this was applied to all idolaters.<note place='foot'>Deut.
VII, 3; Sanh. 57 a-59 b.</note> Hence Maimonides
lays down the rule in his Code that <q>wherever and
whenever the Mosaic law is in force, the people must be
compelled to abjure heathenism and accept the seven laws
of Noah in the name of God, or else they are doomed to
die.</q><note place='foot'>H. Melakim VIII, 9-10.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, in the very same Code, Maimonides
writes in the spirit of Rabbi Meir: <q>Not only the Jewish
tribe is sanctified by the highest degree of human holiness,
but every human being, without difference of birth, in whom
is the spirit of love and the power of knowledge to devote
his life exclusively to the service of God and the dissemination
of His knowledge, and who, walking uprightly before Him,
has cast off the yoke of the many earthly desires pursued
by the rest of men. God is his portion and his eternal inheritance,
and God will provide for his needs, as He did for
the priest and the Levite of yore.</q><note place='foot'>H.
Shemitta we Yobel XIII, 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
10. To be sure, a statement of this nature presents a different
judgment of heathenism from that of the ancient national
law. But the historical and comparative study of religions
has caused us to entertain altogether different views of the
various heathen religions, both those representing primitive
stages of childlike imagination and superstition, and those
more developed faiths which inculcate genuine ideals of a
more or less lofty character. Certainly the laws of Deuteronomy,
written when the nation had dwindled down to the
little kingdom of Judæa, and those further expounded in the
Mishnah enjoining the most rigorous intolerance toward
<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>
every vestige of paganism, had only a theoretical value for
the powerless Jewish nation; while both the Church and
the rulers of Islam were largely guided by them in practical
measures. The higher view of Judaism was expressed by
the last of the prophets: <q><q>For from the rising of the sun
even unto the going down of the same My name is great
among the nations; and in every place offerings are presented
unto My name, even pure oblations, for My name is
great among the nations,</q> saith the Lord of hosts.</q><note place='foot'>Mal.
I. 11.</note> The fact is that heathenism seeks the God whom Israel by its
revelation has found. In this spirit both Philo and Josephus
took the Scriptural passage, <q>Thou shalt not curse God,</q>
taking the Hebrew <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign>
in the plural sense, <q>the gods</q>;
thus they said a Jew must not offend the religious sense of
the heathen by scorn or ridicule, however careful he must
be to avoid the imitation of their practices and
superstitions.<note place='foot'>Ex. XXII, 26; Philo II, 166; Josephus:
<hi rend='italic'>Ant.</hi>, IV, 8, 10; <hi rend='italic'>Con. Apio.</hi>, II,
34; comp. Kohler: <q>The Halakic Portions in Josephus' Antiquities,</q> in
H. U. C. Monthly III, 117.</note>
</p>

<p>
As a matter of fact, the Code of Law aimed to separate
Israel and the nations in order to avoid the crude worship
of idols, animals and stars practiced by the heathen of
antiquity. It was not framed for masters like Socrates,
Buddha, and Confucius, with their lofty moral views and
their claims upon humanity. The God who revealed himself
to Abraham, Job, Enoch, and Balaam, as well as to Moses and
Isaiah, spoke to them also, and the wise ones of Israel have
ever hearkened to their inspiring lessons. Their words are
echoed in Jewish literature together with Solomon's words
of wisdom. Plato, Plotinus, and Aristotle received the most
friendly hospitality from the rabbinic philosophers and mystic
writers of Jewry, and so Buddhist sayings and views penetrated
into Jewish ethics and popular teachings. Both the
<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>
Jew and his literature are cosmopolitan, and Judaism never
withholds its appreciation of the merits of the heathen
world.<note place='foot'>See Meg. 16 a; J. E., art.
Aristotle; Neumark, l. c., Index: Aristoteles,
Plato, Plotin; comp. Bahya: <hi rend='italic'>Hoboth ha Lebaboth</hi>,
and other medieval philosophic works.</note>
</p>

<p>
11. We must especially emphasize one claim of the Jewish
people above other nations which the rabbis call
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>zekuth aboth</foreign>,
<q>the merit of the fathers,</q> and which we may term <q>hereditary
virtue.</q> The election of Israel, in spite of its own
lack of merit, is declared in Deuteronomy and elsewhere
to be due to the merit of the fathers, with whom God concluded
His covenant in love.<note place='foot'>Deut. IV, 37.</note> The promise is often repeated
that God will ever remember His covenant with the fathers
and not let the people perish, even though their sins were
great; therefore the rabbis assumed that the patriarchs had
accumulated a store of merit by their virtues which would
redound before God to the benefit of their descendants, supplementing
their own weaknesses.<note place='foot'>Ex. XXXIII, 12;
Lev. XXVI, 42; Ex. R. XLIV, 7-8; Lev. R. XXXVI,
2-5.</note> This merit or righteousness
of the fathers formed a prominent part of the hope and
prayer, nay, of the whole theological system of the Jewish
people. They regarded the patriarchs and all the great
leaders of the past as patterns of loyalty and love for God,
so that, according to the Midrash, Israel might say in the
words of the Shulamite: <q>Black am I</q> considering my own
merit, <q>but comely</q> when considering the merit of the
fathers.<note place='foot'>Cant. R. I, 5.</note>
Whether this store of merit would ever be exhausted
is a matter of controversy among the rabbis. Some
referred to God's own words that He will ever remember
His covenant with the fathers; others pointed to the verse
in Deutero-Isaiah: <q>For the mountains may depart, and
the hills be removed; but My kindness shall not depart from
<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>
thee, neither shall My covenant of peace be removed,</q> which
they interpreted symbolically to mean: when the merit of
the patriarchs and matriarchs of Israel is exhausted, God's
mercy and compassion for Israel will be there never to
depart.<note place='foot'>Isa. LIV, 10; Shab. 55 a; comp. S. Hirsch: <q>The
Doctrine of Original Virtue</q> in Jew. Lit. Annual, 1905; Schechter, l. c., 170 f.</note>
Translated into our own mode of thinking, this merit
of the fathers claimed for Israel signifies the unique treasure
of a spiritual inheritance which belongs to the Jew. This inheritance
of thousands of years provides such rare examples
and such high inspiration that it incites to the highest virtue,
the firmest loyalty, and the greatest love for truth and justice.
Judaism, knowing no such thing as original sin, points
with pride instead to hereditary virtue, deriving an inexhaustible
source of blessing from its historical continuity of
four thousand years.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_LVI'/>
<head>Chapter LVI. The Stranger and the Proselyte</head>

<p>
1. Among all the laws of the Mosaic Code, that which has
no parallel in any other ancient code is the one enjoining
justice, kindness and love toward the stranger. The Book of
the Covenant teaches: <q>And a stranger shall thou not wrong,
neither shalt thou oppress him; for ye were strangers in the
land of Egypt,</q><note place='foot'>Ex. XXII, 20;
XXIII, 9.</note> and <q>A stranger shalt thou not oppress;
for ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers
in the land of Egypt.</q> The Deuteronomic writer lays special
stress on the fact that Israel's God, <q>who regardeth not persons
nor taketh bribes, doth execute justice for the fatherless and
the widow, and loveth the stranger, in giving him food and
raiment.</q> He then concludes: <q>Love ye therefore the
stranger; for ye were strangers in the land of
Egypt.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. X, 18-19.</note> The
Priestly Code goes still further, granting the stranger the same
legal protection as the native.<note place='foot'>Lev. XIV, 22.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. We would, however, misunderstand the spirit of all
antiquity, including ancient Israel, if we consider this as an
expression of universal love for mankind and the recognition
of every human being as fellow-man and brother. Throughout
antiquity and during the semi-civilized Middle Ages, a stranger
was an enemy unless he became a guest. If he sought protection
at the family hearth or (in the Orient) under the tent of
a Sheik, he thereby entered into a tutelary relation with both
the clan or tribe and its deity. After entering into such a
<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>
relation, temporary or permanent, he became, in the term
which the Mosaic law uses in common with the general Semitic
custom, a <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger</foreign> or
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Toshab</foreign>, <q>sojourner</q> or <q>settler,</q>
entitled to full protection.<note place='foot'>Gen. XXIII, 4; Lev. XX, 35. On the
term <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger</foreign> see W. R. Smith: <hi rend='italic'>The
Religion of the Semites</hi>, 75 ff.; Bertholet: <hi rend='italic'>Die Stellung d.
Israeliten und Juden zu den Fremden</hi>, 28, 178; Schuerer, l. c., III, 150-188; Encyc.
Biblica, art. Stranger and Sojourner; Cheyne, <hi rend='italic'>Bampton Lectures</hi>,
1889, p. 429. Commerce between the Phoenicians and Greeks was protected by the Greek god
of the stranger (Zeus Xenios); see Ihering: <hi rend='italic'>D. Gastfreundschaft im
Alterthum, Deutsche Rundschau</hi>, 1887, showing how the Phoenicians developed the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger</foreign>
idea in the direction of international commerce, just as the Jews developed
it toward international religion; M. J. Kohler: <q>Right of Asylum</q> in Am.
Law Review, LI, p. 381.</note> This relation of dependency on the community
is occasionally expressed by the term: <q>thy stranger
that is within thy gates.</q><note place='foot'>Ex. XX,
10.</note> Such protection implied, in turn,
that the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>protegé</foreign> owed an obligation to the tribe or community
which shielded him. He stood under the protection
of the tribal god, frequently assumed his name, and thus
dared not violate the law of the land or of its deity, lest he forfeit
his claim to protection.
</p>

<p>
3. In accordance with this, the oft-repeated Mosaic command
for benevolence toward the stranger, which placed him
on the same footing with the needy and helpless, imposed
certain religious obligations upon him. He was enjoined, like
the Israelite, not to violate the sanctity of the Sabbath by labor,
nor to provoke God's anger by idolatrous practices, and, according
to the Priestly Code, to avoid the eating of blood and
the contracting of incestuous marriages as well as the transgression
of the laws for Passover and the Day of Atonement.
Naturally, in criminal cases such as blasphemy he was subject
to the death-penalty just like the native.<note place='foot'>Lev.
XVI, 29; XVII, 8-15; XVIII, 26; XXIV, 16-29.</note> Still, the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger</foreign> was
not admitted as a citizen, and in the Mosaic system of law he
was always a tolerated or protected alien, unless he underwent
<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/>
went the rite of circumcision and thus joined the Israelitish
community.<note place='foot'>Ex. XII, 48; see Yeb., 46 a-47
b; Mas. Gerim I-III. The opinion of
Bertholet and Schuerer concerning the semi-proselyte or
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger Toshab</foreign> is contradicted
by both the Book of Jubilees and the Talmudic sources, as will be
shown below.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. With the transformation of the Israelitish State into
the Jewish community&mdash;in other words, with the change of the
people from a political to a religious status,&mdash;this relation to the
non-Jew underwent a decided change. As the contrast to the
heathen became more marked, the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger</foreign>
assumed a new position.
As he pledged himself to abandon all vestiges of idolatry and
to conform to certain principles of the Jewish law, he entered
into closer relations with the people. Accordingly, he adopted
certain parts of the Mosaic code or the entire law, and thus
became either a partial or a complete member of the religious
community of Israel. In either case he was regarded as a follower
of the God of the Covenant. In spite of the exclusive
spirit which was dominant in the period following Ezra, two
forces favored the extending of the boundaries of Judaism
beyond the confines of the nation. On the one hand, the
Babylonian Exile had visualized and partially realized the
prophecy of Jeremiah: <q>Unto Thee shall the nations come
from the ends of the earth, and shall say: <q>Our fathers have inherited
naught but lies, vanity and things wherein there is no
profit.</q></q><note place='foot'>Jer. XVI, 19.</note>
For example, Zechariah announced a time when
<q>many peoples and mighty nations shall come to seek the
Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem and to entreat the favor of the
Lord,</q> and <q>Ten men shall take hold, out of all the languages
of nations, shall even take hold of the skirt of him that
is a Jew, saying, <q>We will go with you, for we have heard that
God is with you.</q></q><note place='foot'>Zech. VIII,
21-23.</note> Another prophet said at the time of the
overthrow of Babylon: <q>For the Lord will have compassion
on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own
<pb n='411'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>
land, and the stranger (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger</foreign>,
or proselyte) shall join himself
with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob.</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
XIV, 1.</note>
The Psalmists especially refer to the heathen who shall join
Israel,<note place='foot'>Ps. XXII, 30; LXVII, 3; LXVIII, 30 f;
LXXXVII, 4 f.</note> so that <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger</foreign>
now becomes the regular term for proselyte.<note place='foot'>II. Chron.
II, 16; XXX, 25.</note>
</p>

<p>
In addition to this inward religious desire we must consider
the social and political impulse. The handful of Judæans who
had returned from Babylonia were so surrounded by heathen
tribes that, while the Samaritans had attracted the less desirable
groups, they were glad to welcome the influx of such as
promised to become true worshipers of God. The chief problem
was how to provide a legal form for these to <q>come over,</q>
<foreign rend='italic'>proselyte</foreign> being the Greek
term for <q>him who comes over.</q>
By such a form they could enter the community while accepting
certain religious obligations. In fact, such obligations had
been stated before in the Priestly Code, which admitted into
the political community as <q>sojourners</q> or <q>indwellers</q>
those who pledged themselves to abstain from idolatry, blasphemy,
incest, the eating of blood or of flesh from living animals,
and from all violence against human life and property.
They were debarred only from marriage into the religious
community, <q>the congregation of the Lord.</q> Henceforth
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger</foreign> and
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger Toshab</foreign>
became juridical terms, the social and legal
designation of those proselytes who had abjured heathenism
and joined the monotheistic ranks of Judaism as <q>worshipers
of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. Thus the first great step in the progress of Judaism from
a national system of law to a universal religion was made in
Judæa. The next step was to recognize the idea of the revelation
of God to the <q>god-fearing men</q> of the primeval ages, as
described in the Mosaic books, and thus to open the gates of
<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/>
the national religion for heathen who had become <q>God-fearing
men</q> or <q>worshipers of the Lord.</q> Thus the Psalms,
after enumerating the customary two or three classes, <q>the
house of Israel,</q> <q>of Aaron,</q> and <q>of Levi,</q> often add the
<q>God-fearing</q> proselyte.<note place='foot'>Ps. CXV,
11; CXVIII, 4; CXXXV, 20; comp. LXVII, 8; CII, 16;
Job I, 1; Tobit LXIV, 6; Sibyll. III, 572, 756; Acts X, 2; XXI, 13; V, 26 f.;
XVI, 44; XVII, 4; XVIII, 7; Midr. Teh. Ps. XXII, 29; Lev. III, 2; Mek.
to Ex. XXII, 20; see Bernays: Ges. Abh., II, 74.</note> The Synagogue was especially
attractive to the heathen who sought religious truth because
of its elevating devotion and its public instruction in the Scripture,
translated into Greek, the language of the cultured world.
This sponsored a new system for propagating the Jewish faith.
The so-called Propaganda literature of Alexandria laid its chief
stress upon the ethical laws of Judaism, not seeking to submit
the non-Jew to the observance of the entire Mosaic law or to
subject him to the rite of circumcision. The Jewish merchants,
coming into contact with non-Jews in their travels on land and
sea, endeavored especially to present their religious tenets in
terms of a broad, universal religion. As a universal faith forms
the background of the entire Wisdom literature, particularly
the book of Job, a simple monotheism could be founded upon
a divine revelation to mankind in general, corresponding to
the one to Noah and his sons after the flood. The laws connected
with this covenant, called the Noahitic laws, were
general humanitarian precepts. We find these enumerated in
the Talmud as six, seven, and occasionally ten. Sometimes
we read of thirty such laws to be accepted by the heathen,
probably founded upon the nineteenth chapter of Leviticus,
at one time central in Jewish ethics.<note place='foot'>Tos.
Ab. Z. IX, 4; Sanh. 56 b-57; Gen. R. XXXIV, 7; Jubil. VII, 20 f.;
Sibyll. III, 38, 762. For the thirty commandments, see Yer. Ab. Z. II, 40 c;
Midr. Teh. Ps. II. 5; Gen. R. XCVIII, 9; J. Q. R., 1894, p. 259. Comp.
also Pseudo-Phocylides in Bernays' <hi rend='italic'>Ges. Abh.</hi>,
I, 291 ff.; Seeberg: <hi rend='italic'>D. beiden
Wege u. d. Aposteldecret</hi>, p. 25. Klein:
<hi rend='italic'>Der aelteste christl. Katechismus</hi>; J. E., art.
Commandments.</note> At any rate, the
<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>
observance of the so-called Noahitic laws was demanded of
all worshipers of the one God of Israel.
</p>

<p>
Strange to say, however, this extensive propaganda of the
Alexandrian Jews during the two or three pre-Christian
centuries left few traces in the history and literature of
Palestinian Judaism. Two reasons seem at hand; the
growth of the Paulinian Church, which absorbed the missionary
activity of the Synagogue, and the effort of Talmudic
Judaism to obliterate the old missionary tradition. To judge
from occasional references in Josephus and the New Testament,
as well as many inscriptions all over the lands of the
Mediterranean,<note place='foot'>See Schuerer, l. c., 165,
175; Harnack, <hi rend='italic'>D. Mission u. Ausbreitung d.
Christentums</hi>, chapter I.</note> the number of heathen converts to the
Synagogue was very large and caused attacks on Judaism in
both Rome and Alexandria. Josephus tells us that Jews and
proselytes in all lands sent sacrificial gifts to Jerusalem in such
abundance as to excite the avarice of the Romans.<note place='foot'>Ant. XVI, 7.</note>
The Midrash preserves a highly interesting passage which casts
light on the earlier significance of the winning of heathen converts,
reading as follows: <q>When it is said in Zephaniah II, 5:
<q>Woe to the inhabitants of the sea-coast, the nation of Kerethites</q>;
this means that the inhabitants of the various pagan
lands would be doomed to undergo <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Kareth</foreign>,
<q>perdition,</q> save
for the one God-fearing proselyte, who is won over to Judaism
each year and set up to save the heathen world.</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
R. XXVIII, 5; Cant. R. I, 4; see Matt. XXIII, 15; Jellinek, B. H.
VI, Introd., p. XLVI.</note> In
other words, the merit of the one proselyte whose conversion
awakens the hope for the winning of the entire heathen world
to pure monotheism, is an atoning power for all. Such was
the teaching of the Pharisees, whom the gospel of Matthew
brands as hypocrites because of their zeal in making
proselytes.
</p>

<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>

<p>
6. This kind of proselytism was encouraged only by Alexandrian
or Hellenistic Judaism. In Palestine, however, the
social system of the nation was quite unfavorable to the simple
<q>God-worshiper,</q> who remained merely a tolerated alien,
even though protected, and never really entered the national
body. Legally he was termed <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger Toshab</foreign>,
<q>settler,</q> which
meant semi-proselyte. The type of this class was Naaman,
the Syrian general who was instructed by Elijah to bathe in
the Jordan to cure his leprosy, and then became a worshiper
of the God of Israel.<note place='foot'>II Kings C, 1-15;
see LXX to verse 14; Sanh 96 b.</note> Similarly, whatever the real origin of
the proselyte's bath may have been, a baptismal bath was
prescribed for the proselyte to wash off the stain of
idolatry.<note place='foot'>See Sota, 12 b; Sibyll. IV, 164;
comp. Gen. R. II, 5; J. E., art. Baptism
and Birth, New; Enc. Religion and Ethics, art. Baptism, Jewish.</note>
He was regarded as one who had <q>fled from his former master</q>
(in heaven) to find refuge with the only God;<note place='foot'>See
J. E., art. Asenath, and the passages quoted there.</note> therefore he
was legally entitled to shelter, support, and religious instruction
from the authorities.<note place='foot'>Sifre and Targum to
Deut. XXIII, 16-19.</note> Certain places were assigned where
he was to receive protection and provision for his needs, but
he was not allowed to settle in Jerusalem, where only full
proselytes were received as citizens.<note place='foot'>Tos.
Negaim VI, 2; Mas. Gerim III.</note> According to Philo,
special hospices were fitted out for the reception of
semi-proselytes.<note place='foot'>Philo, De Monarchia, I, 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. In order to enjoy full citizenship and equal rights, the
proselyte had to undergo both the baptismal bath and the rite
of circumcision, thus accepting all the laws of the Mosaic
Code equally with the Israelite born. Beside this, he had to
bring a special proselyte's sacrifice as a testimony to his belief
in the God of Israel. In distinction from the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger Toshab</foreign>, or
semi-proselyte, he was then called
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger ha Zedek</foreign> or
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger Zedek</foreign>.
This name, usually translated as <q>proselyte of righteousness,</q>
<pb n='415'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>
obviously possesses a deeper historical meaning. The Psalmist
voices a pure ethical monotheism in his query: <q>O Lord, who
shall be a guest (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger</foreign>, sojourner)
in thy tent?</q> which he answers:
<q>He that walketh uprightly and worketh righteousness
and speaketh truth in his heart.</q><note place='foot'>Ps, XV,
1-2; see Cheyne's Commentary.</note> But the legal view of the
priestly authorities was that only the man who offers a <q>sacrifice
of righteousness</q> and pledges himself to observe all the
laws binding upon Israel might become a <q>guest</q> in the
Temple on Zion, an adopted citizen of Jerusalem, the <q>city of
righteousness.</q><note place='foot'>The article <hi rend='italic'>ha Zedek</hi>
seems to point to Jerusalem, called <q>the city</q> or
<q>dwelling place of righteousness</q> (Zedek). See Isa. I, 21; Jer. XXXI, 23;
L, 7. Comp. <q>Gates of righteousness</q> (Zedek) for the Temple gates, in Ps.
CXVIII, 19, and the ancient legendary hero of Jerusalem,
<hi rend='italic'>Malki-Zedek</hi>, Gen. XIV, 18; Josephus, J. W. VI, 10; Epis.
Heb. VII, 10; and <hi rend='italic'>Adoni Zedek</hi>,
first king of Jerusalem, Josh. X, 3.</note>
In illustration of this view a striking interpretation
to a Deuteronomic verse is preserved: <q>They shall
call people unto the mountain, there shall they offer sacrifices
of righteousness: that is, the heathen nations with their
kings who come to Jerusalem for commerce with the Jewish
people shall be so fascinated by its pure monotheistic worship
and its simple diet, that they will espouse the Jewish faith and
bring sacrifices to the God of Israel as proselytes.</q><note place='foot'>Sifre
and Targum to Deut. XXXIII, 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
The prominence of the full proselyte in the early Synagogue
appears in the ancient benediction for the righteous leaders and
Hasidim, the Soferim and Synedrion, the ruling authorities of
the Jewish nation, where special mention is made of <q>the Proselytes
of (the) Righteousness.</q><note place='foot'>Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>
p. 48.</note> These full proselytes pushed
aside the half-proselytes, so that, while both are mentioned in
the earlier classification, only the latter are considered by the
later Haggadah.<note place='foot'>See Mek. Mishpatim XVIII;
comp. A. d. R. N. XXXVI ref. to Isa.
XLIV, 5.</note> With the dissolution of the Jewish State no
juridical basis remained for the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger Toshab</foreign>,
the <q>protected
<pb n='416'/><anchor id='Pg416'/>
stranger.</q> R. Simeon ben Eleazar expressed this in the statement:
<q>With the cessation of the Jubilee year there was no
longer any place for the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger Toshab</foreign>
in Judæa.</q><note place='foot'>Arak. 29 a.</note> We read in
Josephus that no proselytes were accepted in his time unless
they submitted to the Abrahamitic rite and became full
proselytes.<note place='foot'>Vita 25.</note>
</p>

<p>
However, as Josephus tells us, a strong desire to espouse
the Jewish faith existed among the pagan women of neighboring
countries, especially of Syria.<note place='foot'>J. W.
II, 20, 2.</note> The same situation existed
in Rome according to the rabbinical sources, Josephus, Roman
writers, and many tomb inscriptions.<note place='foot'>Josephus:
Ant. XIII, 9, 1; 11, 3; XVIII, 3, 5; XX, 8, 11; Mek. Bo XV:
Beluria (Fulvia or Valeria); Schuerer, III, 176;
<hi rend='italic'>Gemeindeverf. v. Juden in Rome</hi>;
Graetz: <hi rend='italic'>D. juedisch, Proselyten im
Roemerreich</hi>; Radin: <hi rend='italic'>Jews among Greeks and
Romans</hi>, p. 389. See also Crooks: <hi rend='italic'>The
Jewish Rate in Ancient and Roman
History.</hi></note> Conspicuous among
these proselytes was Queen Helen of Adiabene, who won lasting
fame by her generous gifts to the Jewish people in time of
famine and to the Temple at Jerusalem; her son Menobaz, at
the advice of a Jewish teacher, underwent the rite of circumcision
in order to rise from a mere God-worshiper to a full
proselyte.<note place='foot'>Josephus: Ant. XX, 2-4; Yoma III, 10; Yoma 37 a.; Suk. 2 b;
B. B. 11 a; Gen. R. XLVI, 8.</note> The Midrash<note place='foot'>Midrash
Tadshe in Jellinek: B. H. III, 111; Epstein: Jued. <hi rend='italic'>Alierthumskunde</hi>,
XLIII.</note> enumerates nine heathen women
of the Bible who became God-worshipers: Hagar; Asenath,
the wife of Joseph, whose conversion is described in a little
known but very instructive Apocryphal book by that name;<note place='foot'>See
J. E., art. Asenath.</note>
Zipporah, the wife of Moses; Shifra and Puah, the Egyptian
midwives;<note place='foot'>Comp. Sifre Num. 178.</note>
Pharaoh's daughter, the foster-mother of Moses,
whom the rabbis identified with Bithia
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Bath Yah</foreign>, <q>Daughter
of the Lord</q>);<note place='foot'>I Chron. IV, 18; Meg. 13 a.</note>
Rahab, whom the Midrash represents as the
<pb n='417'/><anchor id='Pg417'/>
wife of Joshua and ancestress of many
prophets;<note place='foot'>Meg. 15 b.</note> Ruth and
Jael. Philo adds Tamar, the daughter-in-law of Judah, as a
type of a proselyte.<note place='foot'>Philo: De Nobilitate, 6; II, 443.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. Beside the term <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger</foreign>,
with its derivatives, which gave
legal standing to the proselyte, the religious genius of Judaism
found another term which illustrated far better the idea of
conversion to Judaism. The words of Boaz to Ruth: <q>Be
thy reward complete from the Lord thy God of Israel, under
whose wings thou art come to take refuge,</q><note place='foot'>Ruth II, 12.</note> were
applied by the Pharisean leaders to all who joined the faith as Ruth did.
So it became a technical term for converts to Judaism, <q>to
come, or be brought, under the wings of the divine majesty</q>
(Shekinah).<note place='foot'>Ab. d. R. N., ed. Schechter,
53 f.; Shab. 31 a; Lev. R. II, 8.</note> Philo frequently expresses the idea that the
proselyte who renounces heathenism and places himself under
the protection of Israel's God, stands in filial relation to Him
exactly like the born Israelite.<note place='foot'>See Bertholet,
l. c., 285-287.</note> Therefore Hillel devoted his
life to missionary activity, endeavoring <q>to bring the soul of
many a heathen under the wings of the Shekinah.</q> But in
this he was merely following the rabbinic ideal of
Abraham,<note place='foot'>Ab. d. R. N., l. c.</note>
and of Jethro, of whom the Midrash says: <q>After having been
won to the monotheistic faith by Moses, he returned to his
land to bring his countrymen, the Kenites, under the wings
of the Shekinah.</q><note place='foot'>Mek. to Ex.
XVIII, 27.</note> The proselyte's bath in living water was
to constitute a rebirth of the former heathen, poetically expressed
in the Halakic rule: <q>A convert is like a newborn
creature.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. R. XXXIX, 14; Yeb. 22 a;
comp. Pes. VIII, 8.</note> The Paulinian idea that baptism creates a new
Adam in place of the old is but an adaptation of the Pharisaic
view. Some ancient teachers therefore declared the proselyte's
bath more important than circumcision, since it forms
<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>
the sole initiatory rite for female proselytes, as it was with the
wives of the patriarchs.<note place='foot'>Yeb. 46 a; comp. Josephus: Ant. XX, 2-4.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. The school of Hillel followed in the footsteps of Hellenistic
Judaism in accentuating the ethical element in the
law;<note place='foot'>Shab. 31 a.</note>
so naturally it encouraged proselytism as well. The Midrash
preserves the following Mishnah, handed down by Simeon ben
Gamaliel, but not contained in our Mishnaic Code:
<q>If a <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ger</foreign>
desires to espouse the Jewish faith, we extend to him the hand
of welcome in order to bring him under the wings of the
Shekinah.</q><note place='foot'>Lev, R. II, 8.</note>
Both the Midrash and the early Church literature
reveal traces of a Jewish treatise on proselytes, containing
rules for admission into the two grades, which was written in
the spirit of the Hellenistic propaganda, but was afterward rewritten
and adopted by the Christian Church. The school
of Shammai in its rigorous legalism opposed proselytism in
general, and its chief representative, Eliezer ben Hyrcanos,
distrusted proselytes altogether.<note place='foot'>Gen.
R. LXX, 5; B. M. 59 b.</note> On the other hand, the
followers of Hillel were decidedly in favor of converting the
heathen and were probably responsible for many Haggadic
passages extolling the proselytes. Thus the verse of Deutero-Isaiah:
<q>One shall say, <q>I am the Lord's,</q> and another shall
call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe
with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by
the name of Israel</q> is peculiarly applied in the Midrash. The
first half, we are told, denotes two classes of Israelites, those
who are without blemish, and those who have sinned and repented;
the second half includes the two classes of proselytes,
those who have become full Jews (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Gere ha
Zedek</foreign>) and those who are merely worshippers of God
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Yir'e Shamayim</foreign>). A later
Haggadic version characteristically omits the last, recognizing
only the full converts (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Gere Emeth</foreign>)
as proselytes.<note place='foot'>Mekilta, l. c.; comp. Ab. d. R.
N. XXXVI, ed. Schechter, 107.</note> The
<pb n='419'/><anchor id='Pg419'/>
following parable in the spirit of the Essenes illustrates their
viewpoint. In commenting upon the verse from the Psalms:
<q>The Lord keepeth the strangers,</q> the story is told: A king
possessed a flock of sheep and goats and noted that a deer
joined them, accompanying them to their pasture and returning
with them. So he said to the herdsmen: <q>Take good care
of this deer of mine which has left the free and broad desert
to go in and out with my flock, and do not let it suffer hunger
or thirst.</q> Likewise God takes special delight in the proselytes
who leave their own nation, giving up their fellowship
with the great multitude in order to worship Him as the One
and Only God, together with the little people of
Israel.<note place='foot'>Midr. Teh. Ps. CXLVI, 9; Num. R. VIII, 2.</note> Similarly
the Biblical verse concerning wisdom: <q>I love them that
love me, and those that seek me earnestly shall find me</q><note place='foot'>Prov.
VIII, 17; Num. R., l. c.</note> is
referred to the proselytes, <q>who give up their entire past from
pure love of God, and place their lives under the sheltering
wings of the divine majesty.</q> All these Midrashic passages
and many others are but feeble echoes of the conceptions of
the Hellenistic propaganda, which were so ably set forth by
Philo and the Book of Asenath. Indeed, Judaism must have
exerted a powerful influence upon the cultured world of Hellas
and Rome in those days, as is evidenced both in the Hellenistic
writings of the Jew and in the Greek and Roman writers themselves.
Their very defamation of Judaism unwittingly gives
testimony to the danger to which Judaism exposed the pagan
conception of life, and to the hold it took upon many of the
heathen.<note place='foot'>Schuerer, l. c., III, 4; Radin, l. c.</note>
</p>

<p>
10. The reaction against this missionary movement took
place in Judea. The enforced conversion of the Idumeans
to Judaism by John Hyrcanus benefited neither the nation nor
the faith of the Jew, and turned the school of Shammai, which
belonged to the party of the Zealots, entirely against the whole
<pb n='420'/><anchor id='Pg420'/>
system of proselytism. On the whole, bitter experience taught
the Jews distrust of conversions due to fear, such as those of the
Samaritans who feared the lions that killed the inhabitants, or
to political and social advantage, like those under David and
Solomon, or in the days of Mordecai and Esther, or still later
under John Hyrcanus.<note place='foot'>Yeb. 24 b; Yer.
Kid., IV, 65 b.</note> Instead, all stress was laid upon religious
conviction and loyalty to the law. In fact, Josephus mentions
many proselytes who in his time fell away from
Judaism,<note place='foot'>Apion, II, 10, 3.</note>
who may perhaps have been converts to Christianity. The
later Halakah, fixed under the influence of the Hadrianic persecution
and quoted in the Talmud as Baraitha, prescribes the
following mode of admission for the time after the destruction
of the Temple, omitting significantly much that was used in
the preceding period:<note place='foot'>Yeb. 47 a;
comp. Mas. Gerim I.</note> <q>If a person desires to join Judaism
as a proselyte, let him first learn of the sad lot of the Jewish
people and their martyrdom, so as to be dissuaded from joining.
If, however, he persists in his intention, let him be instructed
in a number of laws, both prohibitory and mandatory,
easy and hard to observe, and be informed also as to the punishment
for their disobedience and the reward for fulfillment.
After he has then declared his willingness to accept the belief
in God and to adhere to His law, he must submit to the rite of
circumcision in the presence of two members of the Pharisean
community, take the baptismal bath, and is then fully admitted
into the Jewish fold.</q> It is instructive to compare this
Halakic rule with the manual for proselytes preserved by the
Church under the name of <q>The Two Ways,</q> but in a
revised form.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Didache
and Klein, l. c.</note> The mode of admission in the Halakah
seems modeled superficially after the more elaborate one
of the earlier code, where the Shema as the Jewish creed
and the Ten Commandments, possibly with the addition
<pb n='421'/><anchor id='Pg421'/>
of the eighteenth and nineteenth chapters of Leviticus and
the twenty-seventh chapter of Deuteronomy, seem to have
formed the basis for the instruction and the solemn oath
of the proselyte.
</p>

<p>
11. As long as the Jewish people possessed a flourishing
world-wide commerce, unhampered by the power of the
Church, they were still joined by numerous proselytes in the
various lands and enjoyed general confidence. Indeed, many
prominent members of the Roman nobility became zealous
adherents of Judaism, such as Aquilas, the translator of the
Bible, and Clemens Flavius, the senator of the Imperial
house,<note place='foot'>Git. 56 b; Ab. Z. 10 b; on Clemens
see Graetz: H. J. II, 387-389; but
see literature in Schuerer, l. c., III, 169.</note>
and many prominent Jewish masters were said to be descendants
of illustrious proselytes.<note place='foot'>Git.
56 b-57.</note> All this changed as soon as the
Christian Church girded herself with <q>the sword of Esau.</q>
From that time on proselytism became a peril and a source
of evil to the Jew. The sages no longer took pride in the
prophetic promise that <q>the stranger will join himself to
Israel,</q> nor did they find in the words <q>and they shall cleave to
the house of Jacob</q> an allusion to the prediction that some
of these proselytes would be added <q>to the priesthood of the
Lord,</q> as some earlier teachers had interpreted the
passage.<note place='foot'>Ex. R. XIX, 4; comp. Midr. Teh.
Ps. LXXXVII, 4, ref. to I Sam. II, 36 and Isa. LXVI, 2; comp. Bacher:
<hi rend='italic'>Agada d. Palest. Amorder</hi>., III, 45, 363.</note>
R. Helbo of the fourth century, on the contrary, explained that
proselytes have become a plague like <q>leprosy</q> for the house
of Jacob, taking the Hebrew <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>nispehu</foreign>
as an allusion to the word
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Sappahat</foreign>,
<q>leprosy.</q><note place='foot'>Yeb. 47 b; 109 b; Kid. 70 b,
ref. Isa. XIV to Lev. XIV, 56.</note> Henceforth all attempts at proselytism
were deprecated and discouraged, while uncircumcised proselytes,&mdash;probably
meaning the persecuting Christians&mdash;were
relegated to Gehinnom.<note place='foot'>Ex. R. XIX, 5.</note>
</p>

<pb n='422'/><anchor id='Pg422'/>

<p>
12. This view was not shared by all contemporaries, however.
R. Abbahu of Cæsarea, who had many an interesting
and bitter dispute with his Christian
fellow-citizens,<note place='foot'>See Bacher, l. c., II, 115-118.</note> was
broad-minded enough to declare the proselytes to be genuine
worshipers of God.<note place='foot'>Num. R. VIII, 1.</note> Joshua ben Hanania
encouraged the proselyte Aquilas and prognosticated great success for proselytes
in general as teachers of both the Haggada and Halakah.
So other Haggadists urged special love and compassion for the
half-proselyte,<note place='foot'>Gen. R. LXX,
5.</note> and entertained a special hope of the Messianic
age that many heathen should turn to God in sincerity
of heart.<note place='foot'>Ab. Z. 3 b.</note>
At all events, it was considered a great sin to reproach
a convert with his idolatrous past.<note place='foot'>B. M. 59 b.</note> Indeed, the
phrase, <q>they that fear the Lord,</q> used so often in the Psalms, is referred
by the Haggadists to the proselytes; true, the chief
stress is laid upon the full proselytes, the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Gere Zedek</foreign>, but a
foremost place in the world to come is still reserved for God-worshipers
like the Emperor Antoninus.<note place='foot'>Midr. Teh.
Ps. XXII, 34; here also a later Haggadist removes the reference
to the half-proselytes. See Buber, l. c.; Yer. Meg. I, 72 b.</note> Thus Psalm
CXXVIII, which speaks of the <q>God-fearing man,</q> was
applied to the proselyte, to whom were therefore promised
temporal bliss and eternal salvation, rejoicing in the Law,
in deeds of love and bounteous blessing from
Zion.<note place='foot'>Num. R. VIII, 10.</note> While the
Halakah remained antagonistic to proselytism on account
of its narrow adherence to the spirit of the Priestly Code, the
Haggadah exhibits a broader view. Resonant with the
spirit of prophecy, it beckons to all men to come and seek
shelter under the wings of the one and only God, in order to
disseminate light and love all over the world.
</p>

<p>
13. Modern Judaism, quickened anew with the spirit of
the ancient seers of Israel, cannot remain bound by a later
and altogether too rigid Halakah. At the very beginning of
<pb n='423'/><anchor id='Pg423'/>
the Talmudic period stands Hillel, the liberal sage and master
of the law, who, like Abraham of old, extended the hand of
fellowship to all who wished to know God and His law; he
actually pushed aside the national bounds to make way for
a faith of love for God and the fellow man. For this is the
significance of his answer to the Roman scoffer who wanted
to hear the law expounded while he was standing on one foot:
<q>Whatever is hateful to thee, do not do to thy fellow man!
That is the law; all the rest is only commentary.</q><note place='foot'>Shab.
31 a.</note> Thus the
leaders of progressive Judaism also have stepped out of the
dark prison walls of the Talmudic Ghetto and reasserted the
humanitarian principles of the founders of the Synagogue,
who welcomed the proselytes into Israel and introduced special
blessings for them into the liturgy. They declare again, with
the author of Psalm LXXXVII, that Zion, the <q>city of God,</q>
should be, not a national center of Israel, but the metropolis of
humanity, because Judaism is destined to be a universal
religion.<note place='foot'>See com. to Ps. LXXXVII, and LXX version.</note>
</p>

<p>
Not that Judaism is to follow the proselytizing methods of
the Church, which aims to capture souls by wholesale conversion
without due regard for the attitude or conviction of the individual.
But we can no longer afford to shut the gate to those
who wish to enter, impelled by conviction or other motives
having a religious bearing, even though they do not conform to
the Talmudic law.<note place='foot'>Yearb. C. C. A.
R., 1891, 1892, 1895.</note> This attitude guided the leaders of American
Reform Judaism at the rabbinical conference under the
presidency of Isaac M. Wise, when they considered the admission
of proselytes at the present time. In their decision
they followed the maxim of the prophet of yore: <q>Open the
gates (of Judaism) that a righteous nation may enter that
keepeth the faith.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XXVI, 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
14. It is interesting to observe how Philo of Alexandria
contrasts those who join the Jewish faith with those who have
<pb n='424'/><anchor id='Pg424'/>
become apostates. The former, he says, become at once prudent,
temperate, modest, gentle, kind, human, reverential, just,
magnanimous, lovers of truth, and superior to the temptations
of wealth and pleasure, whereas the latter are intemperate,
unchaste, unjust, irreverent, low-minded, quarrelsome, accustomed
to falsehood and perjury, and ready to sell their freedom
for sensual pleasures of all kinds.<note place='foot'>Philo,
De Penitentia, 2.</note> In the times of Hellenic
culture apostasy made its appearance among the upper
classes of the Jews. As the higher-minded among the heathen
world were drawn towards the sublime monotheistic faith of
the Jew, so the pleasure-seeking and worldly-minded among
the Jews were attracted by the allurements of Greek culture
to become faithless to the God of Israel, break away from the
law, and violate the covenant. Especially under Syrian rule,
apostasy became a real danger to the Jewish community, and
many measures had to be decided upon to avert it. The
desertion of the ancestral faith was looked upon as rebellion
and treason against God and Israel.<note place='foot'>See
J. E., art. Apostasy and Apostates.</note> With the rise of the
Christian Church to power and influence the number of apostates
increased, and with it also the danger to the small community
of the Jews in the various lands. In the same measure
as the Church made a meritorious practice of the conversion
of the Jews, whether by persuasive means or by force and persecution,
the authorities of Judaism had to provide the Jew
with spiritual weapons of self-defense in the shape of polemical
and apologetic writings,<note place='foot'>See J. E., art.
Apologetic and Polemical Literature.</note> and to warn him against too close a
contact with the apostate, which was too often fraught with
peril for the whole community. As a number of these apostates
became actual maligners of the Jews under the Roman
empire, a special malediction against sectarians, the so-called
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Birkat ha-Minim</foreign>,
was inserted in the Eighteen Benedictions
<pb n='425'/><anchor id='Pg425'/>
under the direction of Gamaliel II.<note place='foot'>Ber.
28 a; Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi> 48.</note> <q>Those who have emanated
from my own midst hurt me most,</q> says the Synagogue,
referring to herself the words of the Sulamite in the Song of
Songs.<note place='foot'>Cant. R. I. 6.</note>
While every other offender from among the Jewish
people is declared to be <q>brother,</q> notwithstanding his
sin,<note place='foot'>Deut. XXV, 3 and Sifre ad loc.; Sanh. 44 a.</note>
the apostate was declared to be one from whom no free-will
offering was to be accepted,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sifra</hi>
Wayikra 2.</note> and to whom the gates of repentance
and the gates of salvation are forever closed.<note place='foot'>Sifre
Num. 112; R. H., 17 a; Tos. Sanh. XIII, 5.</note> The feeling
of bitterness against him grew in intensity, as throughout Jewish
history he often played the despicable rôle of an accuser
of his former coreligionists and betrayer of their faith. The
modern Jew also, though he sympathizes with every liberal
movement among men and respects every honest opinion, however
radically different from his own, cannot but behold in
the attitude of him who deserts the small yet heroic band of
defenders of his ancient faith and joins the great and powerful
majority around him, a disloyalty and weakness of character
unworthy of a son of Abraham, the faithful. Since the
beginning of the new era in the time of Mendelssohn, apostasy
has made great inroads upon the numerical and intellectual
strength of Judaism, especially among the upper classes. It
is no longer, however, of an aggressive character, but rather
a result of the lack of Jewish self-respect and religious sentiment,
against which measures tending to a revival of the
Jewish spirit are being taken more and more. The Jews are
called by the rabbis <q>the faithful sons of the faithful.</q> The
apostate must be made to feel that he is of a lower type,
since he has become a deserter from the army of the battlers
for the Lord, the Only One God of Israel.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='426'/><anchor id='Pg426'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter LVII. Christianity and Mohammedanism, the Daughter-Religions
Of Judaism</head>

<p>
1. <q>It shall come to pass on that day that living waters
shall go out from Jerusalem; half of them toward the eastern
sea and half of them toward the western sea.... And the
Lord shall be King over all the earth; in that day shall the
Lord be One, and His name one.</q><note place='foot'>Zech. XIV, 8-9.</note> These
prophetic words of Zechariah may be applied to the two great world-religions
which emanated from Judaism and won fully half of the human
race, as it exists at present, for the God of Abraham. Though
they have incorporated many non-Jewish elements in their
systems, they have spread the fundamental truths of the
Jewish faith and Jewish ethics to every part of the earth.
Christianity in the West and Islam in the East have aided in
leading mankind ever nearer to the pure monotheistic truth.
Consciously or unconsciously, both found their guiding motive
in the Messianic hope of the prophets of Israel and based their
moral systems on the ethics of the Hebrew Scriptures. The
leading spirits of Judaism recognized this, declaring both the
Christian and Mohammedan religions to be agencies of Divine
Providence, intrusted with the historical mission of coöperating
in the building up of the Messianic Kingdom, thus preparing
for the ultimate triumph of pure monotheism in the
hearts and lives of all men and nations of the world. These
views, voiced by Jehuda ha Levi, Maimonides, and
Nahmanides,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cusari</hi>, IV, 23; Maim.:
H. Melakim XI, 41; <hi rend='italic'>Responsa</hi>, 58; Nahmanides:
<hi rend='italic'>Derashah</hi>, ed. Jellinek, 5; see Rashi and Tosafot
to Ab. Z. 2 a, 57 b; Sanh. 63 b.</note>
were reiterated by many enlightened rabbis of later
<pb n='427'/><anchor id='Pg427'/>
times. These point out that both the Christian and Mohammedan
nations believe in the same God and His revelation
to man, in the unity of the human race, and in the future
life; that they have spread the knowledge of God by a sacred
literature based upon our Scripture; that they have retained
the divine commandments essentially as they are phrased
in our Decalogue; and have practically taught men to fulfill
the Noahitic laws of humanity.<note place='foot'>Solomon ben
Adret; <hi rend='italic'>Responsa</hi>, 302; Yore Deah CXLVIII, 12; Jacob
Emden, Comm. to Abot. V, 17; comp. Chwolson: <hi rend='italic'>D.
Blutanklage</hi>, 64-79.</note> On account of the last fact
the medieval Jewish authorities considered Christians to be
half-proselytes,<note place='foot'>Isaac ben Sheshet's
<hi rend='italic'>Responsa</hi>, 119.</note> while the Mohammedans, being
pure monotheists, were always still closer to Judaism.
</p>

<p>
2. In general, however, rabbinic Judaism was not in a
position to judge Christianity impartially, as it never learned
to know primitive Christianity as presented in the New Testament.
We see no indication in either the oldest Talmudic
sources or Josephus that the movement made any more impression
in Galilee or Jerusalem than the other Messianic
agitations of the time. All that we learn concerning Jesus
from the rabbis of the second century and later is that magic
arts were practiced by him and his disciples who exorcised
by his name; and, still worse, that the sect named after him
was suspected of moral aberrations like a few Gnostic sects,
known by the collective name of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Minim</foreign>,
<q>sectarians.</q><note place='foot'>Yer. Shab. XIV, 14 d; Ab. Z. II, 40
d; Sota, 47 a; Sanh. 103 a; Eccl. R. I, 24-25.</note> As
a matter of fact, the early Church was chiefly recruited from
the Essenes and distinguished itself little from the rest of the
Synagogue. Its members, who are called Judæo-Christians,
continued to observe the Jewish law and changed their attitude
to it only gradually.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Christianity;
Ebionites; Minim; and comp. the various
Church Histories.</note> Matters took a different turn
<pb n='428'/><anchor id='Pg428'/>
under the influence of Paul, the apostle to the heathen, who
emphasized the antinomian spirit; the Judæo-Christian sects
were then pushed aside, hostility to Judaism became prominent,
and the Church strove more and more for a <foreign rend='italic'>rapprochement</foreign>
with Rome.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Saul of
Tarsus.</note> Then the rabbis awoke to the serious
danger to Judaism from these heretics, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Minim</foreign>,
when after the tragic downfall of the Jewish nation they grew to world-power
as allies of the Roman Empire. Thus Isaac Nappaha,
a Haggadist of the fourth century, declared: <q>The turning
point for the advent of the Messiah, the son of David, will not
come until the whole (Roman) Empire has been converted
to Christianity
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Minuth</foreign>).</q><note place='foot'>Sanh.
97 a.</note> This is supplemented by the
Babylonian Rabbah, who plays with a Biblical phrase, saying:
<q>Not until the whole (Roman) world has turned to the
Son (of God).</q><note place='foot'>Lev. XIII, 13:
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Kullo happak laben</foreign>, instead of
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>laban</foreign>.</note> Henceforth Christian Rome was
termed <emph>Edom</emph>, like pagan Rome from the days of Herod the Idumean.
In fact, her imperial edicts showed the fratricidal hatred of
Esau, with hardly a trace of the professed religion of love.
No wonder the Haggadists identified Rome with the Biblical
<q>Boar of the forest,</q> and waited impatiently for the time
when she would have to give up her rule as the fourth world-empire
to the people of God, ushering in the Messianic era.<note place='foot'>Ab.
d. R. N. XXXIV; Lev. R. XIII, 4 ref. to Ps. LXXX, 14; Midr.
Teh. Ps., l. c.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. Meanwhile the relapse of Christianity from monotheism
became more steady and more apparent. The One God of
the Jew was pushed into the background by the <q>Son of
Man</q>; and the Virgin-Mother with her divine child became
adored like the Queen of Heaven of pagan times, showing
similarity especially to Isis, the Egyptian mother-goddess,
with Horus, the young son-god, on her lap. The pagan
deities of the various lands were transformed into saints of
<pb n='429'/><anchor id='Pg429'/>
the Church and worshiped by means of images, in order to
win the pagan masses for the Christian faith. The original
pure and absolute monotheism and the stern conception of
holiness were thus turned into their very opposites by the
hierarchy and monasticism of the Church. How, then, could
the Jewish people recognize the crucified Christ as one of their
own? One whose preaching seemed to bring them only
damnation and death instead of salvation and life, even while
speaking in the name of Israel's God after the manner of the
prophets of yore? How could they see in the strange doctrines
of the Church any resemblance to their own system of
faith, especially as the very doctrines which repelled them
were those most emphasized by Christianity? Maimonides
considered the adherents of the Roman Church to be
idolaters,<note place='foot'>H. Akkum IX, 4.</note>
a view which was modified by the Jewish authorities in the
West, as they became better acquainted with Christian
doctrines.<note place='foot'>Tosaf. Sanh. 63 b; Isserles Sh.
Ar. Orah Hayim, 156; comp. J. E. art.
Sanhedrin, Napoleonic.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. The world-empire of the Church was subsequently
divided between Rome, which the Jewish writers called
<hi rend='italic'>Edom</hi>,<note place='foot'>Edom,
the name for Rome since the time of the Idumean Herod, became
the name for the Church of Rome, while
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Yavan</foreign> = Greek was the name given
to the Greek Church.</note> and Byzantium, which they
named <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Yavan</foreign>, but neither
showed any real advance in religious views and ideals. On
the contrary, they both persecuted with fire and sword the
little people who were faithful to their ancient monotheism,
and suppressed what remained of learning and science. As
the Church had the great task of disciplining wild and semi-barbarous
races, there was little room left for learning or for
high ideals. At this time a rigorous avenger of the persecuted
spirit of pure monotheism arose among the sons of Ishmael
in the desert of Arabia in the person of Mohammed, a camel-driver
<pb n='430'/><anchor id='Pg430'/>
of Mecca, a man of mighty passions and void of learning,
but imbued with the fire of the ancient prophets of Israel.
He felt summoned by Allah, the God of Abraham, to wage
war against the idolatry of his nation and restore the pure
faith of antiquity. He kindled a flame in the hearts of his
countrymen which did not cease, until they had proclaimed
the unity of God throughout the Orient, had put to flight
the trinitarian dogma of the Church in both Asia and Africa,
and extended their domain as far as the Spanish peninsula.
He offered the Jews inducements to recognize him as the
last, <q>the seal,</q> of the prophets, by promising to adopt some
of their religious practices; but when they refused, he showed
himself fanatical and revengeful, a genuine son of the Bedouins,
unrelenting in his wrath and ending his career as a cruel,
sensuous despot of the true Oriental type. Nevertheless,
he created a religion which led to a remarkable advancement
of intellectual and spiritual culture, and in which
Judaism found a valuable incentive to similar endeavors.
Thus Ishmael proved a better heir to Abraham than was
Esau, the hostile brother of Jacob.<note place='foot'>On Ishmael
and Edom see Steinschneider: <hi rend='italic'>Polemisch. u. Apologet. Literatur</hi>,
256-273; on Mohammed, eodem, 302-388.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. The important, yet delicate question, which of the
three religions is the best, the Mohammedan, Christian or
Jewish, was answered most cleverly by Lessing in his <hi rend='italic'>Nathan
the Wise</hi>, by adapting the parable of the three rings, taken
from Boccaccio. His conclusion is that the best religion is
the one which induces men best to promote the welfare of
their fellow men.<note place='foot'>See Wuensche: <q>Urspr. d. Parabel
v. d. drei Ringen</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Lessing-Mendelssohn
Gedenkbuch</hi>, Leipzig, 1879; comp. Steinschneider, l. c., 37, 317, 319;
<hi rend='italic'>Hebr. Bibliogr.</hi> IV, 79; XII, 21;
Dunlop-Liebrecht: <hi rend='italic'>Gesch. d. Prosadichtung</hi>,
p. 221, note to 294 f.</note> But the question itself is much older; it
was discussed at the court of the Kaliphs in Bagdad as early
as the tenth century, where the adherents of every religion
<pb n='431'/><anchor id='Pg431'/>
there represented expressed their opinions in all candor. For
centuries it was the subject of philosophical and comparative
investigations.<note place='foot'>See Schreiner: <hi rend='italic'>D. juengst.
Urteile u. d. Judenth.</hi>, 3-5.</note> Among these, the most thorough and profound
is the <hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi> by the Jewish philosopher and poet, Jehuda
ha Levi. But the parable of the three rings also has been
traced through Jewish and Christian collections of tales
dating back to the thirteenth century, and seems to be
originally the work of a Jewish author. Standing between
the two powerful faiths with their appeal to the temporal
arm, the Jew had to resort to his wit as almost his only resource
for escape. Two Jewish works have preserved earlier
forms of the parable. In Ibn Verga's collection of histories of
the fifteenth century, it is related that <q>Don Pedro the Elder,
King of Aragon (1196-1213), asked Ephraim Sancho, a
Jewish sage, which of the two religions, the Jewish or Christian,
was the better one. After three days' deliberation, the
sage told the king a story of two sons who had each received
a precious stone from their father, a jeweler, when he went
on a journey. The sons then went to a stranger, threatening
him with violence, unless he would decide which of the jewels
was the more valuable. The king, believing the story to be
a fact, protested against the action of the two sons, whereupon
the Jew explained: Esau and Jacob are the two sons
who have each received a jewel from their heavenly Father.
Instead of asking me which jewel is the more precious, ask
God, the heavenly Jeweler. He knows the difference, and
can tell the two apart.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Shebet Yehudah</hi>,
ed. Wiener, p. 107. See Steinschneider: Heb. Bibl., l. c.</note>
</p>

<p>
An older and probably more original form of the parable
was discovered by Steinschneider in a work by Abraham
Abulafia of the thirteenth century, running as follows: <q>A
father intended to bequeath a precious jewel to his only son,
but was exasperated by his ingratitude, and therefore buried
<pb n='432'/><anchor id='Pg432'/>
it. His servants, however, knowing of the treasure, took it
and claimed to have received it from the father. In the
course of time they became so arrogant that the son repented
of his conduct, whereupon the father gave him the jewel
as his rightful possession.</q> The story ends by stating
that Israel is the son and the Moslem and Christian the
servants.
</p>

<p>
Beside this witty solution of a delicate problem, some
Mohammedans made attempts very early, doubtless on account
of discussions with learned Jews, to prove the justification
of the three religions from the Jewish Scriptures
themselves. Thus they referred the verse speaking of the
revelation of God on Sinai, Mount Seir, and Mount Paran<note place='foot'>Deut.
XXXIII, 2; see Steinschneider: <q>Pol. u. Apol. Lit.,</q> 317 f.</note>
to the religious teachings of Moses, Jesus, and Mohammed.
Naturally, the Jewish exegetes and philosophers objected
vigorously to such an interpretation.
</p>

<p>
6. The question which religion is the best, has been most
satisfactorily answered for Judaism by R. Joshua ben Hanania,
who said that <q>the righteous of the heathen have also a share
in the world to come.</q><note place='foot'>Tos. Sanh. XIII, 2; Sanh. 105
a; Maimonides: H. Teshubah III, 5.</note> The question which religion is true,
has been, alas, too long arbitrated by the sword, and will be
decided peacefully only when the whole earth will be full of
the knowledge of God. Our own age, however, has begun to
examine the title to existence of every religion from the broad
standpoint of history and ethnology, assigning to each its proper
rank. In this large purview even the crude beliefs of savages
are shown to be of value, and the various heathen religions
are seen to have a historical task of their own. Each of them
has to some extent awakened the dormant divine spark in
man; one has aided in the growth of the ideal of the beautiful
in art, another in the rise of the ideal of the true in philosophy
and science; a third in the cultivation of the ideal of the
<pb n='433'/><anchor id='Pg433'/>
good and in stimulating sympathy and love so as to ennoble
men and nations. Thus after a careful examination of the
historical documents of the Christian and Mohammedan
religions, it is possible to state clearly their great historic
mission and their achievements in the whole domain of civilization.
The Jewish religion, as the mother who gave birth
to both, must deliver the verdict, how far they still contribute
to the upbuilding of God's kingdom on earth. In fulfilling
their appointed mission, each has given rise to valuable
and peculiar institutions, and each has fallen short of the
Messianic ideal as visualized by our great prophets of old.
Only an impartial judgment can say which one has reached
the higher stage of civilization.
</p>

<p>
7. Christianity's origin from Judaism is proved by its
religious documents as well as by its very name, which is
derived from the Greek for the title Messiah
(<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Christos</foreign>), bestowed
on the Nazarene by his followers. Still the name
Christianity arose in Antioch among non-Jews who scarcely
knew its meaning. All the sources of the New Testament,
however much they conflict in details, agree that the movement
of Christianity began with the appearance of John the
Baptist, a popular Essene saint. He rallied the multitude
at the shore of the Jordan, preparing them for the approaching
end of the Roman world-kingdom with the proclamation,
<q>Wash yourselves clean from your sins!</q> that is, <q>Take the
baptismal bath of repentance, for the kingdom of heaven is
nigh.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. III, 2; Luke III, 3;
Josephus: Ant. XVIII, 5, 2; see J. E., art.
John the Baptist. Perhaps John was identical with Hanan, <q>the hidden one,</q>
a popular saint called <q>father</q> by the people, and believed to be a descendant
of Moses, a grandson of Onias the rainmaker, and a rain-invoking saint himself.
See Taan. 23 b; Tanh. Waera, ed. Buber, II, 37.</note>
He conferred the baptismal bath of repentance upon
Jesus of Nazareth and the first apostles.<note place='foot'>Matt.
III, 33; Mark I, 7; Luke III, 21; John I, 29-40.</note> Jesus took up this
message when John was imprisoned and finally killed by
<pb n='434'/><anchor id='Pg434'/>
Herod Antipas on account of his preachment against
him.<note place='foot'>Matt. IV, 12; XIV, 10.</note>
The life of Jesus is wrapt in legends which may be reduced
to the following historical elements:<note place='foot'>J. E.,
art. Christianity; Jesus; New Testament; Simon Kaifa. Among
the Gospels, that of Luke has the oldest records, rather than Mark. See also
Spitta: <hi rend='italic'>D. Synoptische Grundschrift</hi>.</note> The young Nazarene
was of an altogether different temperament from that of John
the Baptist, the stern, Elijah-like preacher in the
wilderness;<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. John the Baptist.</note>
he manifested as preacher and as a healer of the sick a profound
love for, and tender sympathy with suffering humanity,
a trait especially fostered among the Essenes. This drew him
toward that class of people who were shunned as unclean by
the uncompromising leaders of the Pharisees, and also by
the rigid brotherhoods of the Essenes, whose chief object was
to attain the highest degree of holiness by a life of asceticism.
His simple countrymen, the fishers and shepherds of Galilee, on
hearing his wise and humane teachings and seeing his miraculous
cures, considered him a prophet and a conqueror of the
hosts of demons, the workers of disease. In contrast to the
learned Pharisees, he felt it to be his calling to bring the good
tidings of salvation to the poor and outcast, to <q>seek the lost
sheep of the house of Israel</q> and win them for God. He soon
found himself surrounded by a multitude of followers, who,
on a Passover pilgrimage to Jerusalem, induced him to announce
himself as the expected Messiah. He attracted the
people in Jerusalem by his vehement attacks upon the
Sadducean hierarchy, which he threatened with the wrath of
heaven for its abuses, and also by his denunciations of the
self-sufficient Pharisean doctors of the law. Soon the crisis
came when he openly declared war against the avarice of the
priests, who owned the markets where the sacrificial fowl for
the Temple were sold, overthrowing the tables of the money-changers,
and declaring the Temple to have become <q>a den
<pb n='435'/><anchor id='Pg435'/>
of robbers.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. XXI, 12, and parallels;
comp. Yer. Taan. IV, 8; Tos. Menah.
XIII, 21.</note> The hierarchical council delivered him to
Pontius Pilatus, the Roman prefect, as an aspirant to the
royal title of Messiah, which in the eyes of the Romans meant
a revolutionary leader. The Roman soldiers crucified him
and mocked him, calling him, <q>Jesus, the king of the
Jews.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. XXVII, 37-42, and parallels.</note>
</p>

<p>
The fate of crucifixion, however, did not end the career of
Jesus, as it had that of many other claimants to the Messiahship
in those turbulent times. His personality had impressed
itself so deeply upon his followers that they could not admit
that he had gone from them forever. They awaited his
resurrection and return in all the heavenly glory of the <q>Son
of Man,</q> and saw him in their ecstatic visions, attending their
love-feasts,<note place='foot'>John XX; the latter part
of the Gospel of John belonged originally to
Matthew.</note> or walking about on the lake of Nazareth while
they were fishing from their boats, or hovering at the summit
of the mountains.<note place='foot'>Matt. XIV, 24 f.;
XVII, 1; see Wellhausen: Comm.</note> This was but the starting point of
that remarkable religious movement which grew first among
the lower classes in northern Palestine and
Syria,<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Ebionites.</note> then gradually
throughout the entire Roman Empire, shaking the whole
of heathendom until all its deities gave way to the God of
Israel, the divine Father of the crucified Messiah. The
Jewish tidings of salvation for the poor and lowly offered by
the Nazarene became the death-knell to the proud might of
paganism.
</p>

<p>
8. But the ways of Providence are as inscrutable as they
are wonderful. The poor and lowly members of the early
Christian Churches, with their leaders, called <q>apostles</q> or
<q>messengers</q> of the community,&mdash;elected originally to carry
out works of charity and love,<note place='foot'>See J. E.,
art. Apostles.</note>&mdash;would never have been able
<pb n='436'/><anchor id='Pg436'/>
to conquer the great world, if they had persisted in the Essene
traditions. They owed their success to the large Hellenistic
groups who joined them at an early period and introduced
the Greek language as their medium of expression. Henceforth
the propaganda activity of the Alexandrian Jews was
adopted by the young Church, which likewise took up all the
works of wisdom and ethics written in Greek for the instruction
of the proselytes and the young, scarcely known to the
Palestinian schools. The Essene baptism for repentance was
replaced by baptism for conversion or initiation into the new
faith, while the neophyte to be prepared for this rite was for
a long time instructed mainly in the doctrines of the Jewish
faith.<note place='foot'>J. E., art. Didache and
Didascalia; Klein, l. c.</note> Subsequently collections of wise sayings and moral
teachings ascribed to the Nazarene and handed down in the
Aramaic vernacular, orally or in writing, were translated into
Greek. These together with the manuals for proselytes were
the original Church teachings. The Greek language paved the
way for the Church to enter the great pagan world, exactly as
the Greek translation of the Bible in Alexandria brought the
teachings of Judaism to the knowledge of the outside world.
</p>

<p>
At first the same obstacle confronted the early Church
which had prevented the Synagogue from becoming a world
conqueror, namely, the rite of circumcision, which was required
for full membership. Without this, baptized converts
were only half-proselytes and could not be fully assimilated.
This classification was still upheld by the Apostolic Convention,
which met under the presidency of James the Elder.<note place='foot'>Acts
XV, 5-29; comp. R. Seeberg: <hi rend='italic'>Das Aposteldecret; Didache u. d.
Urchristenheit</hi>.</note>
The time was ripe for a bold and radical innovation, and at
this psychological moment arose a man of great zeal and unbridled
energy as well as of a creative genius and a mystical
imagination,&mdash;Saul of Tarsus, known by his Roman name
<pb n='437'/><anchor id='Pg437'/>
Paulus.<note place='foot'>J. E., art. Saul of
Tarsus.</note> He had been sent by the authorities at Jerusalem
to pursue the adherents of the new sect, but when he had
come as far as Damascus in Syria, he suddenly turned from a
persecutor into the most ardent promoter of the nascent
Church, impelled by a strange hallucination. Paul was a
carpet weaver by trade, born and reared in Tarsus, a seaport
of Asia Minor, where he seems to have had a Greek training
and to have imbibed Gnostic or semi-pagan ideas beside his
Biblical knowledge. In this ecstatic vision on his journey he
beheld the figure of Jesus, <q>the crucified Christ,</q> whose adherents
he was pursuing, yet whom he had never seen in the
flesh, appearing as a heavenly being whom Paul identified as
the heavenly Adam, the archetypal <q>godlike</q> man.
</p>

<p>
Upon this strange vision he constructed a theological system
far more pagan than Jewish in type, according to which
man was corrupt through the sin of the first couple, and the
death of Jesus on the cross was to be the atoning sacrifice
offered by God himself, who gave His own son as a ransom
for the sins of humanity. This doctrine he used as a lever
with which, at one bold stroke, he was to unhinge the Mosaic
law and make the infant Church a world-religion. Through
baptism in the name of the Christ, the old sin-laden Adam was
to be cast off and the new heavenly Adam, in the image of
Christ, put on instead. The new covenant of God's atoning
love was to replace the old covenant of Sinai, to abolish forever
the old covenant based upon the Jewish law, and to set mankind
free from all law, <q>which begets sin and works wrath.</q>
In Christ, <q>who is the end of the law,</q> the sinfulness of the
flesh should be overcome and the gates of salvation be opened
to a world redeemed from both death and sin.<note place='foot'>Paul's
opposition to the law includes the moral law, and even the Decalogue.
See Romans VII-VIII; X, 4; XIV; I Cor. VI, 1-3, 15; VII, 31;
VIII; II Cor. III, 3.</note> The one
<pb n='438'/><anchor id='Pg438'/>
essential for salvation was to accept the <emph>mystery</emph> concerning
the birth and death of Christ, after the manner of the heathen
mystery-religions, and to employ as sacramental symbols of
the mystery the rites of baptism and communion with Christ.
</p>

<p>
9. This system of Paul, however, demanded a high price of
its votaries. Acceptance of the belief meant the surrender
of reason and free thinking. This breach in pure monotheism
opened the door for the whole heathen mythology and the
worship of the heathen deities in a new form. But the
saddest result was the dualism of the system; the kingdom
of God predicted by the prophets and sages of Israel for all
humanity was transferred to the hereafter, and this life with
all its healthy aspirations was considered sinful and in the
hands of Satan. The cross, originally a sign of
life,<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Cross.</note> became
from this time and through the Middle Ages a sign of death,
casting a shadow of sin upon the Christian world and a
shadow of terror upon the Jew.
</p>

<p>
The greatest harm of all, however, was done to Judaism
itself. Paul made a caricature of the Law, which he declared
to be a rigid, external system, not elevating life, but only
inciting to transgression and engendering curse. He even
aroused a feeling of hatred toward the Law, which grew in
intensity, until it became a source of untold cruelty for many
centuries. This spirit permeated the Gospels more and more
in their successive appearance, even finding its way into the
Sermon on the Mount. In the simple form given in the
Gospel of Luke this was a teaching of love and tenderness;
in Matthew, Jesus is represented as offering a new dispensation
to replace the revelation of Sinai.<note place='foot'>Luke VI,
20-49; comp. with Matt. V-VII; XXIII, 15-36. See Claude
Montefiore, <hi rend='italic'>The Synoptic Gospels</hi>, I
and II; G. Friedlander, <hi rend='italic'>Jewish Sources of
the Sermon on the Mount</hi>; Kohler: <q>D. Naechstenliebe im
Judenth.,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Judaica</hi>,
Berlin, 1912.</note> Here the Mosaic
law is presented as a system of commandments demanding
<pb n='439'/><anchor id='Pg439'/>
austere adherence to the letter with no regard to the inner
life, whereas, on the other hand, the actual teachings of the
Nazarene were animated by love and sympathy, emanating
from the ethical spirit of the Law. Yet the very words of
Jesus in this same sermon disavow every hint of antinomianism:
<q>Verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one
jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law till all be
fulfilled.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. V, 17-18.</note>
As a matter of fact, the very teachings of love
and inwardness which are embodied in both the Sermon on
the Mount and the epistles of Paul were largely adopted
from the Pharisean schools and Hasidean works as well as
from the Alexandrian Propaganda literature and the Proselyte
Manuals preserved by the Church.
</p>

<p>
In fact, part of this criticism was voiced by the Pharisees,
as they attacked the Sadducean insistence upon the letter
of the Law. The Pharisean spirit of progress applied new
methods of interpretation to the Mosaic Code and especially
to the Decalogue, deriving from them a higher conception of
God and godliness, breaking the fetters of the letter, and
working mainly for the holiness of the inner life and the endeavor
to spread happiness about.<note place='foot'>See J. E.,
and Enc. Rel. and Ethics, art. Pharisees; Lauterbach, <q>The
Sad. and Phar.,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Stud. in Jew.
Lit.</hi>, Berlin, 1913; Herford: <hi rend='italic'>Pharisaism</hi>;
Wuensche: <hi rend='italic'>Neue Beitr. z. Erläuterung d.
Evangelien</hi>.</note> Taking no heed of the
actual achievements of the Synagogue, the Paulinian Church
rose triumphantly to power after the downfall of the Jewish
State and impregnated the Christian world with hostility to
Judaism and the Jew, which lasts to this very day, thus turning
the gospel of love into a source of religious hatred.
</p>

<p>
10. Nevertheless it cannot be denied that Paulinian Christianity,
while growing into a world-conquering Church, achieved
the dissemination of the Sinaitic doctrines as neither Judaism
nor the Judæo-Christian sect could ever have done. The
<pb n='440'/><anchor id='Pg440'/>
missionary zeal of the apostle to the heathen caused a fermentation
and dissolution in the entire neo-Jewish world,
which will not end until all pagan elements are eliminated.
Eventually the whole of civilization will accept, through a
purified Christianity, the Fatherhood of God, the only Ruler
of the world, and the brotherhood of all men as His children.
Then, in place of an unsound overemphasis on the principle of
love, justice will be the foundation of society; in place of a
pessimistic other-worldliness, the optimistic hope for a kingdom
of God on earth will constitute the spiritual and ethical
ideal of humanity. We must not be blind to the fact that
only her alliance with Rome, her holding in one hand the
sword of Esau and in the other the Scriptures of the house
of Jacob, made the Church able to train the crude heathen
nations for a life of duty and love, for the willing subordination
to a higher power, and caused them to banish vice and
cruelty from their deep hold on social and domestic life.
Only the powerful Church was able to develop the ancient
Jewish institutions of charity and redeeming love into magnificent
systems of beneficence, which have led civilization
forward toward ideals which it will take centuries to realize.
</p>

<p>
Nor must we overlook the mission of the Church in the
realm of art, a mission which Judaism could never have
undertaken. The stern conception of a spiritual God who
tolerated no visible representation of His being made impossible
the development of plastic art among the Jews. The
semi-pagan image worship of the Christian Church, the representation
of God and the saints in pictorial form, favored
ecclesiastical art, until it broadened in the Renaissance into
the various arts of modern times. Similarly, the predominance
of mysticism over reason, of the emotions over the intellect
in the Church, gave rise to its wonderful creation of music,
endowing the soul with new powers to soar aloft to undreamed-of
heights of emotion, to be carried along as upon Seraph's
<pb n='441'/><anchor id='Pg441'/>
wings to realms where human language falters and grows
faint. Beyond dispute Christianity deserves great credit for
having among all religions opened wide the flood gates of the
soul by cultivating the emotions through works of art and
the development of music, thereby enriching human life in
all directions.
</p>

<p>
11. Islam, the other daughter of Judaism, for its part,
fostered the intellectual side of humanity, so contemptuously
neglected by the Church. The cultivation of philosophy
and science was the historical task assigned to the Mohammedan
religion. From the sources of information we have
about the life and revelation of Mohammed, we learn that
the origin of the belief in Allah, the God of Abraham, goes
back to an earlier period when Jewish tribes settled in south
Arabia. Among these Jews were traders, goldsmiths, famous
warriors, and knights endowed with the gift of song, who disseminated
Jewish legends concerning Biblical heroes.<note place='foot'>See J. E.,
art. Mohammed; Islam; and the works of Muir, W. Robertson
Smith, Hirschfeld; of Geiger, Weil, Sprenger, von Kremer, Noeldeke, Grimme,
Dozy, and above all Goldziher, on the Koran, Mohammed and Islam; also
Enc. Religion and Ethics, VIII, 871-907.</note> Amid
hallucinations and mighty emotional outbursts this belief in
Allah took root in the fiery soul of Mohammed, who thus
received sublime conceptions of the one God and His creation,
and of the world's Judge and His future Day of Judgment.
The sight of idolatry, cruelty, and vice among his countrymen
filled him with boundless indignation, so that he began his
career as a God-sent preacher of repentance, modeling his
life after the great prophets of yore. With drastic threats of
the last Judgment he tried to force the idolaters to return to
Allah in true repentance. But few of his hearers believed in
his prophetic mission, and the leading men of the city of
Mecca, who derived a large income from the heathen sanctuary
there, opposed him with fierce and violent measures.
</p>

<pb n='442'/><anchor id='Pg442'/>

<p>
Thus he was forced to flee to the Jewish colony of Yathrib,
afterwards called Medina, <q>the city</q> of the prophet. He
hoped for recognition there, especially after he had made
certain concessions, such as turning the face toward Jerusalem
in prayer, and keeping the Day of Atonement on the
tenth of Tishri. In addition, he emphasized the unity of
God in the strongest possible manner, and opposed every
encroachment upon it by the belief in additional powers or
persons, attacking the Christians on the one hand and his
Arabian countrymen on the other, with the sarcastic phrase:
<q>Verily, God has neither a son, nor has He any daughter.</q>
In spite of all these facts, the Jews could not be brought to
recognize the uneducated son of the desert as a prophet. Therefore
his proffered friendship was turned to deadly hatred and
passionate revenge. His whole nature underwent a great
change; his former enthusiasm and prophetic zeal were replaced
by calculation and worldly desire, so that the preacher
of repentance of Mecca became at the last a lover of bloodshed,
robbery and lust. Instead of Jerusalem he chose Mecca
with its heathen traditions as the center of his religious system
and aimed chiefly to win the Arabian tribes for his divine
revelation.
</p>

<p>
Thus the entire Arabian nation, full of youthful energy,
burning with the impulse of great deeds, bore the faith of the
One God to the world by the sword. Like Israel of old, it
stepped forth from the desert with a divine revelation contained
in a holy book. It conquered first the Christian lands
of the East, which under the Trinitarian dogma had lapsed
from pure monotheism, then the northern coast of Africa, and
it finally unfurled the green flag of Islam over the lands of
the West to free them from the fanatical Church. Henceforth
war was waged for centuries between the One God of Abraham
and the triune God of the Church in both Spain and
Palestine. Then might the genius of history ask: <q>Watchman,
<pb n='443'/><anchor id='Pg443'/>
what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?</q>
And again the words are heard, as from on high: <q>The morning
cometh, and also the night.</q> The final victory is yet to
come.
</p>

<p>
12. It cannot be denied that the Mohammedan monotheism
has a certain harshness and bluntness. It cannot win the
heart by the mildness of heaven or the recognition of man's
individuality. <foreign rend='italic'>Islam</foreign>, as the name denotes, demands blind
submission to the will of God, and it has led to a fatalism
which paralyzes the sense of freedom, and to a fanaticism
which treats every other faith with contempt. Islam has
remained a national religion, which has never attained the
outlook upon the whole of humanity, so characteristic of the
prophets of Israel. Its view of the hereafter is crude and
sensuous, while its picture of the Day of Judgment bears no
trace of the divine mercy. On the other hand, we must recognize
that the reverence of the Koran lent the <q>Men of the
Book,</q> the representatives of culture, greater dignity, and
provided a mighty incentive to study and inquiry. Damascus
and Bagdad became under the Caliphs centers of learning,
of philosophical study and scientific investigation, uniting
Nestorian, Jew, and Mohammedan in the great efforts towards
general enlightenment. The consequence was that Greek
science and philosophy, banished by the Church, were revived
by the Mohammedan rulers and again cultivated, so that
Judaism also felt their fructifying power. Our modern Christian
civilization, so-called by Christian historians, is largely
the fruit of the rich intellectual seeds sown by Mohammedans
and Jews, after the works of ancient Greeks had been translated
into Syrian, Arabic, and Hebrew by a group of Syrian
Unitarians (the Nestorians) assisted by Jewish
scholars.<note place='foot'>See Draper, <hi rend='italic'>Conflict of
Religion with Science</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Intellectual Development
of Europe</hi>; Lecky, <hi rend='italic'>History of Rationalism</hi>;
Andrew D. White: <hi rend='italic'>Warfare between
Religion and Science</hi>; Krauskopf: <hi rend='italic'>Jews and
Moors in Spain</hi>.</note>
</p>

<pb n='444'/><anchor id='Pg444'/>

<p>
As for instance the Hohenstaufen Emperor Frederick II, the
friend of Jewish and other liberal thinkers, was much more of
an investigator than a believer, so did the spirit of investigation
derived from Islam and Judaism pervade Christendom, and
create the great intellectual movements which finally undermined
its creeds and shattered its solidarity into contending
sects. <emph>Return</emph> to the Bible and the God of the Bible, to a
Sabbath devoted to instruction in the word of God, and to
the recognition of human freedom and the sanctity of the
family&mdash;this was the watchword of the Reformation. Return
to the right of free thought and free conscience, which implies
the pure worship of God as He lives in the heart, is
now the watchword of those who endeavor to reform the
Protestant Church. That is, both are moved by a desire
to return to the principles and ideals set forth by Israel's
prophets of old.
</p>

<p>
13. Both the Church, Protestant and Catholic, and the
Mosque have a Providential mission which they must fulfill
through the ages of history, until all the heathen have learned
to worship God as the spirit of holiness in man, instead of
seeking Him in the blind forces of nature or of destiny. True,
the Mohammedan religion is predisposed to sensuality and
still awaits the process of purification to become completely
spiritualized; yet indications are not lacking that a process of
reform is approaching to bring out the gold of pure monotheism
and cast off the dross of Oriental voluptuousness and
superstition. We must remember that during the dark night
of medieval ignorance and barbarism Islam carried throughout
all lands the torch of philosophy and scientific investigation
and of the pure faith in God. Even to-day it accomplishes
far more for the advancement of life in the east of Asia and
the south of Africa than did the Russian Church with her
gross superstition and idolatry, or even some branches of
Protestantism, with their deification of a human being.
</p>

<pb n='445'/><anchor id='Pg445'/>

<p>
Between Church and Mosque, hated and despised by both,
stood and still stands the Synagogue, proudly conscious of its
divine mission. It feels itself the banner-bearer of a truth
which brooks no compromise, of a justice which insists on
the rights of all men. It offers the world a religion of peace
and love, admitting no division or discord among mankind,
waiting for the day when the God of Sinai shall rear high His
throne in the hearts of all men and nations. To-day the
Synagogue, rejuvenated by the influences of modern culture,
looks with ever greater confidence to a speedy realization of
its Messianic hope for all humanity.
</p>

<p>
Hitherto Judaism was restrained by its two daughter-religions
from pursuing its former missionary activity. It
was forced to employ all its energy in the single effort for self-preservation.
But in the striking contrasts of our age, when
the enlightened spirit of humanity struggles so bitterly with
the forces of barbarism and brutality, we may well see the
approaching dawn of a new era. That glorious day, we feel,
will witness the ultimate triumph of justice and truth, and
out of the day which is <q>neither day nor night</q> will bring
forth the time when <q>the Lord shall be King over all the
earth, the Lord shall be One and His name One.</q><note place='foot'>Zech.
XIV, 6-9.</note> This
will be an auspicious time for Israel to arise with renewed
prophetic vigor as the bearer of a world-uniting faith, as the
triumphant Messiah of the nations. Through Israel the
monotheistic faiths of the world may find a union so that, in
fulfillment of the ancient prophecy,<note place='foot'>Isa.
LXVI, 20.</note> its Sabbath may be a
world-Sabbath and its Atonement Day a feast of at-one-ment
and reconciliation for all mankind. <q>He that believeth shall
not make haste.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XXVIII, 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
Yet just because of this universalistic Messianic hope of
Judaism it is still imperative, as it has been throughout the
past, that the Jewish people must continue its separateness
<pb n='446'/><anchor id='Pg446'/>
as <q>a Kingdom of priests and a holy nation,</q> and for the sake
of its world-mission avoid intermarrying with members of
other sects, unless they espouse the Jewish
faith.<note place='foot'>Ex. XIX, 6; Num. XXIII, 9; Deut. VII, 2-6; Isa. LXI, 6; 9; Maim.
H. Issure Biah XII, 1; Sh. A. Eben ha Ezer XVI, 1; Einhorn
in <hi rend='italic'>Jewish Times</hi>
1876, against Sam. Hirsch; Samuel Schulman in Y. B. C. C. A. R. 1909, comp.
D. Philipson, l. c. Index s. v. Intermarriage; J. E., art. Intermarriage; also
Mielziner: <hi rend='italic'>The Jewish Law of Marriage and
Divorce</hi>, p. 45-54, where the opinions
of L. Philippson, Geiger, Aub, Einhorn and I. M. Wise are quoted.</note> Israel's
particularism, says Professor Lazarus,<note place='foot'>Lazarus,
l. c., § 159.</note> has its universalism
as motive and aim.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='447'/><anchor id='Pg447'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter LVIII. The Synagogue and its Institutions</head>

<p>
1. Every religion, as soon as it attains any degree of self-consciousness,
aims to present a convincing form of truth to
the individual and to win adherents in increasing numbers.
Nevertheless the maintenance of a religion does not rest upon
its doctrines, which must differ according to the intellectual
capacity of the people and the prevailing views of each
age. Its stability is based upon those forms and institutions
which lend it a peculiar character, and which express, symbolically
or otherwise, definite ideas, religious, ethical, and
historical. For this reason many exponents of Judaism
would entirely discard the idea of a systematic theology, and
insist on the observance of the ceremonial laws as the one
essential. In following tradition in this manner, they forget
that the forms of religious practice have undergone many
changes in the course of time. In fact, the vitality of Judaism
lies in its unique capacity for development. Its ever youthful
mind has constantly created new forms to express the ideas
of the time, or has invested old ones with new meanings.<note place='foot'>See
Kohler: <q>Origin a. Function of Ceremonies in Judaism,</q> in Y. B. C. C.
of Am. R., 1907. Rosenau: <hi rend='italic'>Jewish Ceremonies,
Institutions a. Customs</hi>, 1912.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. The greatest and, indeed, the unique creation of Judaism
is the Synagogue, which started it on its world-mission and
made the Torah the common property of the entire people.
Devised in the Exile as a substitute for the Temple, it soon
eclipsed it as a religious force and a rallying point for the
whole people, appealing through the prayers and Scriptural
<pb n='448'/><anchor id='Pg448'/>
lessons to the congregation as a whole. The Synagogue was
limited to no one locality, like the Temple, but raised its
banner wherever Jews settled throughout the globe. It was
thus able to spread the truths of Judaism to the remotest
parts of the earth, and to invest the Sabbath and festivals
with deeper meaning by utilizing them for the instruction and
elevation of the people. What did it matter, if the Temple
fell a prey to the flame for a second time, or if the whole sacrificial
cult of the priesthood with all its pomp were to cease
forever? The soul of Judaism lived indestructibly in the
house of prayer and learning. In the Synagogue was fanned
the holy flame which kindled the heart with love of God
and fellow-men; here were offered sacrifices more pleasing
to God than the blood and fat of beasts, sacrifices of love
and charity.<note place='foot'>See art. Synagogue, in various encyclopedias;
Enelow: <hi rend='italic'>The Synagogue in
Modern Life</hi>; Schuerer, l. c., II, 429; Bousset, l. c., 197 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. The Synagogue has its peculiar institutions and ceremonies,
but no sacraments like those of the Church. Its
institutions, such as the festivals, aim to preserve the historic
memory of the people; its ceremonies, called <q>signs</q>
or <q>testimonies</q> in the Scripture, are to sanctify the life of
the nation, the family, or the individual. Neither possesses
a sacramental power, as does baptism or communion in the
Church, in giving salvation, or imparting something of the
nature of the Deity, or making one a member of the religious
community. The Jew is a member of the Jewish community
by his birth, which imposes upon him the obligations of the
covenant which God made with Israel at Mount Sinai. Judaism
is a religious heritage intrusted to a nation of priests, and
is not acquired by any rite of consecration or confession of
faith. Such a form of consecration and confession is required
only in the case of proselytes.<note place='foot'>See
Chapter <ref target='Chapter_LVI'>LVI</ref> above; J. E., art. Proselyte.</note>
<pb n='449'/><anchor id='Pg449'/>
It is superfluous to state that Confirmation does not bestow
the character of Jew upon the young, any more than the
former rite of Bar Mizwah did upon the young Israelite who
was called up to the reading from the Law in his thirteenth
year as a form of initiation into Jewish life.<note place='foot'>See
J. E., art. Bar Mizwah and Confirmation.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. The rite of circumcision is enjoined upon the father in
the Mosaic Code as a <q>sign</q> of the covenant with Abraham,
to be performed on every son on the eighth day after
birth.<note place='foot'>Gen. XVII, 10-14.</note>
Therefore it is held in high esteem, and the father terms the
act in his benediction <q>admission into the covenant of
Abraham</q>;<note place='foot'>Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>, p. 305.</note>
but in spite of this it is not a sacrament and does
not determine membership in the Jewish community. The
operation was not to be performed by a person of sacred calling
such as priest or rabbi, but in ancient Biblical times was
performed by women,<note place='foot'>Ex. IV, 25; see commentaries; Ebers:
<hi rend='italic'>Ægypten</hi>, B. M. I, 183.</note> and in the Talmudic period by the
surgeon.<note place='foot'>Josephus: Ant. XX, 2,4;
Shab. 130 b, 133 b, 156 a; Men. 42 a; Ab. Z.
26 b; comp. Gen. R. XLVI, 9.</note> In fact, if no Jewish surgeon was at hand, some
Talmudic authorities held that a non-Jewish surgeon could
perform it. Moreover, where hygienic reasons forced the
omission of the rite, the man was still a
Jew.<note place='foot'>Ab. Z. 27 a.</note> The rite itself
underwent a change; it was performed with stone knives
in Biblical times, just as in Egypt and even to-day in Arabia
and Syria.<note place='foot'>Ex. IV, 25; Josh. V, 2;
comp. Tylor: <hi rend='italic'>Early History of Mankind</hi>, 217-222;
J. E. and Encyc. of Rel. and Ethics, art. Circumcision;
Ploss: <hi rend='italic'>Knabenbeschneidung</hi>,
p. 11.</note> It became a mark of distinction for the people
during the Exile.<note place='foot'>Gen. XVII, 10-14;
comp. Deut. X, 16; Jer. IX, 25; Claude Montefiore:
Hibbert Lectures, 229, 337.</note> But the act was invested with special
religious sanctity during the Syrian persecution, when many
Jewish youths <q>violated the covenant</q> in order to appear
uncircumcised when they appeared in the arena with the
<pb n='450'/><anchor id='Pg450'/>
heathen.<note place='foot'>I Macc. I, 15, 48, 60; Josephus: Ant. XII, 5, 1; Aboth III,
11; Tos. Shab. XV, 9; Yer. Peah I, 16 b; Gen. R. XLVI, 9; Jubil. XV, 26
f.</note> At this time new methods were introduced to guard
the <q>seal</q> of the covenant,<note place='foot'>Yer.
Shab. XIX, 6; Yeb. 71 b.</note> while pious mothers faced martyrdom
willingly to preserve the rite of Abraham among their
children. Later on the rabbis even declared circumcision
to be a safeguard against the pit of Gehenna<note place='foot'>Gen.
R. XLVIII, 7; Tanh. Lek Leka, ed. Buber, 27; Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>,
304, after Tos. Ber. VI, 12, 13; Shab. 137 b.</note> and made
Elijah the guardian of the covenant.<note place='foot'>P. d. R. El. XIX.</note> The rite
may be traced back to primitive life, when the operation was
usually performed at the time of puberty and as a preliminary
to marriage,<note place='foot'>Ploss: <hi rend='italic'>Geschicht.
u. Ethnol. ue. Knabenbeschneidung</hi>, 1844; Encyc. Rel. and
Ethics, art. Circumcision.</note> but in Jewish life it assumed a religious
meaning and became endeared to the people as the
consecration of the child as the future head of a family.
The idea underlying the institution (as Zunz correctly calls
it)<note place='foot'>Zunz: <hi rend='italic'>Ges. Schr.</hi>
II, 197; comp. <hi rend='italic'>Rabbin Gutachlen ue. d. Beschneidung</hi>,
1844; Frankel: Zeitsch., 1844, p. 66-67.</note> is
the sanctification of the Jewish household as represented
by its male members. The member of a people
that is to be holy unto God must bear the seal of the
covenant on his flesh; as a potential father of another
generation, the sign he bore had a deeper meaning for the
future of the people.<note place='foot'>See J. E., art.
Circumcision; Sam. Cohn: <hi rend='italic'>Gesch. d. Beschneidung b. d.
Juden</hi> (Hebrew), Cracaw, 1903, for the extensive
literature.</note> The rationalistic view that the Mosaic
law is merely hygienic, although found as early as Philo, is
quite erroneous.<note place='foot'>Philo II, 210; Josephus:
Con. Apion. II, 13; Saadia: <hi rend='italic'>Emunoth</hi>, III, 10;
Maimonides: <hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>, III, 49; Michaelis:
<hi rend='italic'>Mosaisches Recht</hi>, IV, 184-186.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. The same rationalist view<note place='foot'>Maimonides, l. c.,
III, 48; Samuel ben Meir to Lev. XI, 3; Michaelis,
l. c., IV, 202.</note> is often applied to the
<pb n='451'/><anchor id='Pg451'/>
dietary laws of the Mosaic Code, but without any justification
from the Biblical point of view. These laws prohibit
as unclean various species of animals, or such as have fallen
dead or as the prey of wild beasts, or certain portions like blood
and suet.<note place='foot'>Lev. XI; Deut. XIV, 3-21; Ex. XXII, 30; Lev. VII, 23; XVII,
9 f.; see Kalisch's: commentary to Lev. vol. II, 2-189; J. E., art. Dietary Laws.</note>
The Holiness Code states its reason for these
prohibitions very emphatically: <q>I am the Lord your God,
who have set you apart from the peoples. Ye shall therefore
separate between the clean beast and the unclean, and between
the unclean fowl and the clean; and ye shall not make
your souls detestable by beast, or by fowl, or by any thing
wherewith the ground teemeth, which I have set apart for
you to hold unclean. And ye shall be holy unto Me; for I
the Lord your God am holy, and have set you apart from the
peoples, that ye should be Mine.</q><note place='foot'>Lev.
XX, 24-26, which belongs to Lev. XI, 1-47; comp. Deut. XIV,
3-21.</note> The Deuteronomic
Code gives the same reason for the prohibition of the unclean
beasts: <q>For thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God.</q>
It seems that these prohibitions of <q>unclean</q> foods were
intended originally for the priesthood and other holy men,
as appears in Ezekiel and elsewhere.<note place='foot'>See
Ezek. XLIV, 31; IV, 14; Jud. XIII, 7, 14. The law in Ex. XXII,
30, <q>Ye shall be holy men unto Me, therefore ye shall not eat any flesh that is
torn of beasts in the field,</q> seems to have been originally only for priests and
other holy men.</note> As a matter of fact,
the same class of animals from which the Israelites were commanded
to abstain were also forbidden to the priests or saints of
India, Persia, Mesopotamia, and partly of Egypt.<note place='foot'>See
<hi rend='italic'>Laws of Manu</hi>, V, 7; 11-20 in <hi rend='italic'>Sacred
Books of the East</hi>, XXV, 171 f.;
comp. II, 64; XIV, 38-48; 74; 184; <hi rend='italic'>Bundahish</hi>,
XIV; S. B. E. V, 47; Chwolson:
<hi rend='italic'>Die Szabier</hi>, II, 7; 102; Porphyrius:
<hi rend='italic'>De Abstinentia</hi>, IV, 7; Sommer, <hi rend='italic'>Bibl.
Abh.</hi> 271-322; J. E., l. c., 599.</note> The
natural conclusion is that the Mosaic law intended these
rules as a practical expression of its general principle that
<pb n='452'/><anchor id='Pg452'/>
Israel was to be <q>a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.</q><note place='foot'>Ex.
XIX, 6.</note> In other words, Israel was to fill the usual place of the priest
among the nations of the ancient world, a priest-people observing
the priestly laws of sanctification. Whatever the
origin of these customs may have been, whether they were
tabu laws in connection with totemism or some other primitive
view, the Priestly Code itself admits their lack of an Israelitish
origin by recognizing that they were known to
Noah.<note place='foot'>Gen. VII, 2, 8.</note> They
were simply adopted by the law-giver of Israel to make the
whole people feel their priestly calling.
</p>

<p>
In later times the dietary laws, especially abstinence from
the flesh of swine, became a mark of distinction which separated
the Jew from his heathen surroundings; and they became
a symbol of Jewish loyalty in the Syrian persecutions
when pious Jews faced martyrdom for them as willingly as
for the refusal to adore the Syrian idols.<note place='foot'>II
Macc. VI, 18; VII, 41.</note> In fact, Pharisaism
adopted the principle of separation from the heathen in every
matter pertaining to diet, and this spirit of separatism was
strengthened by the scorn of the Greeks and Romans and
afterward by the antinomian spirit of Christianity. While
Hellenistic writers, eager to find a universal meaning in these
laws, assigned certain physical or psychic reasons for
them,<note place='foot'>Aristeas, 144-170.</note>
the rabbis of the Talmud insisted that they were given solely
for the moral purification of Israel. Thus they were to be
observed as tests of Israel's submission to the divine will and
not because of personal distaste. In their own words, <q>We
must overcome all desire for the sake of our Father in heaven</q>;
and <q>Only to those who wrestle with temptation does the
kingdom of God come.</q><note place='foot'>Sifra to
Lev. XX, 26; Tanh. to Lev. XI, 2.</note> In the course of time these prohibitions
were steadily extended, until they encircled the
whole life of the Jew, forming an insurmountable wall which
secluded him from his non-Jewish environment. Finally,
<pb n='453'/><anchor id='Pg453'/>
separation from the world came to be regarded as an end in
itself.<note place='foot'>Shab. 17 b; Ab. Z. 36 b, 38
a, 8 a; Sanh. 104 a; P. d. R. El. XXIX.</note>
</p>

<p>
Now, it cannot be denied that these laws actually disciplined
the medieval Jew, so that during centuries of wild
dissipation he practiced sobriety and moderation; as Maimonides
says,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Moreh</hi>, III, 25; see also
Morris Joseph, l. c., 180-189.</note> they served as lessons in self-mastery, in curbing
carnal desire, and keeping him clean in soul as well as
body. The question remains whether they still fulfill their
real object of consecrating Israel to its priestly mission among
the nations. Certainly the priestly character of these
laws is no longer understood, and the great majority of the
Jewish people who live among the various nations have
long discarded them. Orthodox Judaism, which follows
tradition without inquiring into the purpose of the laws,
is entirely consistent in maintaining the importance of
every item of the traditional Jewish life. Reform Judaism
has a different view, as it sees in the humanitarianism of
the present a mode of realizing the Messianic hope of Israel.
Therefore it cannot afford to encourage the separation of
the Jew from his environment in any way except through
the maintenance of his religion, and cannot encourage the
dietary laws as a means of separatism. Its great problem
is to find other methods to inculcate the spirit of holiness
in the modern Jew, to render him conscious of his priestly
mission, while he lives in unison and fellowship with all his
fellow-citizens.<note place='foot'>For the orthodox view, see
S. R. Hirsch: <hi rend='italic'>Horeb</hi>, Chap. LXVIII; M.
Friedlander: <hi rend='italic'>The Jewish Religion</hi>, 237;
for the reform, Einhorn: <hi rend='italic'>Sinai</hi>, 1859;
Kohler: <hi rend='italic'>Jewish Times</hi>, 1872; Geiger:
<hi rend='italic'>Ges. Schr.</hi> I, 253 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. The tendency to distinguish the Jew from his non-Jewish
neighbor in the course of time found expression in the
laws for wearing phylacteries (<foreign rend='italic'>tefillin</foreign>)
on his forehead and arm, a special sign on the doorpost of his house
(<foreign rend='italic'>mezuzzah</foreign>)
<pb n='454'/><anchor id='Pg454'/>
and fringes (<foreign rend='italic'>zizith</foreign>)
on the four corners of his shawl
(<foreign rend='italic'>tallith</foreign>).<note place='foot'>Deut.
VI, 8-9; XI, 18-20; Num. XV, 38-39.</note>
As a matter of fact, the original Biblical passages had no such
meaning, but acquired it through rabbinical interpretation.
The Mosaic law said: <q>And thou shalt bind them for a sign
upon thy hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine
eyes. And thou shalt write them upon the doorposts of thy
house and upon thy gates.</q> This refers clearly to the words
of God, admonishing the people to keep them in mind, as
the preceding verse indicates. Likewise, the precept regarding
the fringes upon the four-cornered garment emphasizes
rather the blue thread in the fringes, which is to help the people
remember the commandments of the Lord, that they may
not go astray, <q>following after the promptings of their own
hearts and eyes.</q> As the name phylacteries shows, these
were originally talismans or amulets. True, the law as stated
in Deuteronomy may be taken symbolically;<note place='foot'>Comp.
Prov. III, 3; Samuel ben Meir to Ex. XIII, 9.</note> but the
corresponding passage in Exodus, which is traditionally referred
to the phylacteries, indicates its origin by its close relation
to the Passover sacrifice. The blood of this was, no
doubt, put originally on the arm and forehead,<note place='foot'>Ex.
XIII, 9 and commentaries.</note> which is
still done by the Samaritans<note place='foot'>Stanley:
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. of the Jewish Church</hi>, I, 561;
Peterman: <hi rend='italic'>Reisen im Orient</hi>,
I, 237.</note> and has striking parallels in the
practice of the Fellahin in Palestine and Syria.<note place='foot'>Curtiss:
<hi rend='italic'>Ursemitische Religion</hi>, Chap. XX-XXI; Kohler:
<hi rend='italic'>Monatsschrift</hi>,
1893, p. 445, note.</note> Originally
the sacrificial blood was supposed to ward off evil spirits from
men, beasts and houses or tents, and gradually this pagan
custom was transformed into a religious precept to consecrate
the body, life, and home of the Jew. In more ancient times the
phylacteries were worn by pious men and women all day and
not merely during the time of prayer, and seem to have served
<pb n='455'/><anchor id='Pg455'/>
both as a religious symbol and an amulet. This was certainly
the case with the <foreign rend='italic'>mezuzzah</foreign> on the doorpost and probably
with the blue thread at the corners of the
<foreign rend='italic'>tallith</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Ber.
6 a, 14 b, 23 a, b; Tos. Ber. VII, 25; Midr. Teh. to Ps. VI, 1; Yer.
Peah I, 15 d; Targum Song of Songs, VIII, 3; Pes. III
b; Schorr: <hi rend='italic'>HeHalutz</hi>,
VII, 56-57; Baentsch: Comm. to Num. XV, 37; also Schuerer, G. V. II,
483-486.</note> As both
phylacteries and <foreign rend='italic'>tallith</foreign>
came into use at the divine service in
connection with the recital of the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shema</foreign>
and the chapter on the <foreign rend='italic'>zizith</foreign>,
the symbols assumed a higher meaning. Arrayed
in his vestments, the pious Jew offered daily allegiance to
his Maker, feeling that he was thereby protected from evil
within and without; similarly, the sacred sign upon the
door both consecrated and protected his home. Even with
this conception the talismanic character was never quite
forgotten. Throughout the Middle Ages these ceremonies
were observed as divine commandments; and tradition
having seemingly fixed them for all time, the Jew took
great pride in the fact that he was <q>distinguished</q> in many
ways, and especially in his forms of
worship.<note place='foot'>Cant. R. III, 11; Sifre Deut. 43; M. K. 16 b.</note> Of course,
they distinguished him far more when these ceremonies
were practiced for the entire day. Since the modern era has
brought the Jew nearer to his neighbors and he has opened
the Synagogue to invite the non-Jewish world to hear its
teachings, these practices have lost their hold upon the
people, becoming meaningless forms. The wearing of these
sacred symbols while at prayer seems superfluous as a
means of <q>turning men's hearts away from frivolous and
sinful thoughts.</q><note place='foot'>Kohler, l. c.: comp.
Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Studies</hi>, I, 249; Morris Joseph, l. c., p. 178,
where he quotes Maimonides H. Tefillin IV, 25.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. The most important institution of the Synagogue, and
the one most fraught with blessing for all mankind, is the
Sabbath. Although its name and existence point to a Babylonian
<pb n='456'/><anchor id='Pg456'/>
origin,<note place='foot'>See art. Sabbath in
various encyclopedias and the Babel-Bibel controversies;
Zimmern and Schrader: K. A. T., II, 592 f.; Jastrow: American
Journal of Theology, 1898, p. 315-352.</note>
it is still the peculiar creation of the Jewish
genius and a chief pillar of the Jewish religion. As a day of
rest crowning the daily labor of the week, it testifies to the
Creator of the universe who made all that is in accordance
with His divine plan of perfection. The underlying idea
expressed in Scripture is that the Sabbath is a divine institution.
As God himself worked out His design for the world
in absolute freedom and rested with delight at its completion,
so man is to follow His example, working during six
days of the week and then enjoying the rest of the Sabbath
with a mind elated by higher thoughts. Moreover, the day
of rest observed by Israel should recall his redemption from
the slavery and continual labor of Egypt. Thereby every
creature made in God's image, the slave and stranger as well
as the born Israelite, is given the heavenly boon of freedom
and recreation to hallow the labor of the week. There are
thus two explanations given for the Sabbath, one in the
Decalogue of Exodus, the Holiness Code and Priestly
Code,<note place='foot'>Ex. XX, 8-11; XVI, 23-29; XXXV, 2-3; XXXI, 13; comp. Jer.
XVIII, 21-27; Neh. XIII, 15-18.</note>
the other in the Decalogue of Deuteronomy and the Book of
the Covenant.<note place='foot'>Deut. V, 12-15; Ex.
XXIII, 12; XXXIV, 21; comp. Isa. LVIII, 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
These two views, in turn, gave rise to different conceptions
of the Sabbath laws. Many ancient teachers laid chief stress
on the letter of the law which bids men cease from labor.
Others, who penetrated farther into the spirit of Deuteronomy
and the Covenant Code, emphasized the human need for
relaxation and refreshment of soul. The older school, especially
the Sadducees, demanded absolute cessation of labor on
pain of death for any work, however insignificant, and even
for the moving from one place to another. They thought of
<pb n='457'/><anchor id='Pg457'/>
the Sabbath as a sign of the covenant between God and Israel,
and hence held that it should be observed as punctiliously
as possible.<note place='foot'>See Jubilees II, 23-30;
L, 6; Geiger, <hi rend='italic'>Zeitsch.</hi>, 1868, 116; <hi rend='italic'>Nachgel.
Schr.</hi>, III, 286 f.; V, 142 f.; Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Document
of a Jewish Sect</hi>, I; XXV; XLVIII-L; Halevi:
<hi rend='italic'>The Commandments of the Sabbath for the Falashas</hi>,
1902; Harkavy L. K., II, 69 f., for the Karaites.</note>
In the same measure as the Pharisees, with their
program of religious democracy and common sense, obtained
the upper hand, the Biblical strictness of the Sabbath law was
modified. The term labor was defined by analogy with the
work done for the tabernacle, and so restricted as to make the
death penalty much more limited.<note place='foot'>Shab.
VII, 2, 70 a; Mek. Wayakhel.</note> Moreover, the Pharisees
held that the Sabbath was made for man, not man for the
Sabbath;<note place='foot'>Mek. Ki Thisla I, comp. Mark
II. 2 f.</note> so, although they adhered strictly to the prohibition
of labor, the Sabbath received at their hands more of the
other element, and became a day for the elevation of the
soul, <q>a day of delight</q> for the spirit.<note place='foot'>Isa.
LVIII; Shab. 118 a, b; Mek. Yithro VII; Pes, R. XXIII, p. 121.</note> The whole man,
body and soul alike, should enjoy God's gifts more fully on
this day; he should cast off care and sanctify the day by
praise offered to God at the family table. At a very early
period in Israel the Sabbath was distinguished by the words of
instruction and comfort offered by the prophets to the people
who consulted them on the day of rest.<note place='foot'>II
Kings IV, 23.</note> During the Exile
and afterward the people assembled on the Sabbath to hear
the word of God read from the Torah and the prophets and
to join in prayer and song, which soon became a permanent
institution.<note place='foot'>Philo II, 137, 166,
281, 631.</note> Thus the Sabbath elevated and educated the
Jewish people, and afterward transferred its blessings also
to the Christian and Mohammedan world. Especially during
the Middle Ages the Sabbath became an oasis, a refreshing
spring of water for the Jew. All through the week he was a
<pb n='458'/><anchor id='Pg458'/>
Pariah in the outside world, but the Sabbath brought him
bliss in his home and spiritual power in his Synagogue and
school. Cheerfully he bore the yoke of statutes and ordinances
that grew ever heavier under the rabbinical amplification;
for he hailed the Sabbath as the <q>queen</q> that raised
him from a hated wanderer to a prince in his own
domain.<note place='foot'>See Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Studies</hi>,
I, 249 f.; Morris Joseph, l. c., 202-214.</note>
</p>

<p>
Modern life has worked great changes in the Jewish observance
of the Sabbath. Caught up in the whirl of commercial
and industrial competition, the Jew, like Ixion in the fable,
is bound to his wheel of business, and enjoys neither rest for
his body nor elevation for his soul on God's holy day. True,
the Synagogue still preserves the sanctity of the ancient
Sabbath, however small may be the attendance at the divine
service, and in many pious homes the family still rallies around
the festive table, lighted by the Sabbath lamp and decorated
by the symbolic cup of wine. But for the majority of Western
Jews the Sabbath has lost its pristine sanctity and splendor,
to the great detriment of Jewish religious life. Therefore
many now ask: <q>Is it sufficient to have a vicarious observance
of the historical Sabbath, the <q>sign between God and
Israel,</q> by an hour or two in the Synagogue, but without rest
for the entire day? Or shall the civic day of rest, though
Christian in origin and character, take the place of the Jewish
Sabbath with its sacred traditions, so that possibly at last
it may become the Sabbath day predicted by the seer upon
which <q>all flesh shall come to worship before the Lord</q>?</q><note place='foot'>See
David Philipson: <hi rend='italic'>Reform Movement in Judaism</hi>, 275-302, 503-508;
E. G. Hirsch in J. E., art. Sabbath; Sabbath and Sunday.</note> In
the halcyon days of the reform movement in Germany this
view was often expressed when the radical reformers celebrated
the civic day of rest as the Jewish Sabbath, not in
the spirit of dissension, but for the sake of giving Judaism a
larger scope and a wider outlook. In America, too, the idea
<pb n='459'/><anchor id='Pg459'/>
of transferring the Sabbath to Sunday was broached by some
leading Reform rabbis and met with hearty support on the
part of their congregations. Since then a more conservative
view has taken hold of most of the liberal elements of Jewry
also in America. While divine service on Sundays has been
introduced with decided success in many cities and eminent
preachers bring the message of Judaism home to thousands
that would otherwise remain strangers to the house of God
and to the influence of religion, the conviction has become
well established that the continuity with our great past must
be upheld, and the general feeling is that the historical Sabbath
should under no condition be entirely given up. It is
inseparably connected with the election of Israel as a priest-people,
while the Christian <q>Lord's Day</q> represents views
and tendencies opposed to those of Judaism, whether considered
in its original meaning or in that given it by the
Church.<note place='foot'>See Schaff-Herzog Encyc.,
art. Sunday.</note> The Jew may properly use the civic day of rest
in common with his Christian fellow-citizen for religious
devotion and instruction for young and old; it will supplement
his neglected Sabbath service, until conditions have
changed. Perhaps the Jew in Mohammedan countries may
even at some time observe Friday as is done by the Mosque,
and accordingly consecrate this day in common with his fellow-citizens.
Still, between the Sabbath observed by the Church
and the one of the Mosque stands the Jewish Sabbath in
solemn grandeur and patriarchal dignity, waiting with Israel,
its keeper and ally, for the day when all humanity will worship
the one holy God of Abraham, and when our ancient Sabbath
may truly become the Sabbath of the world.
</p>

<p>
8. In all lands time was originally regulated by the movements
of the moon, which are within the observation of all.
The alternation of its increase and decrease divided the month
into two parts, which were then subdivided into four. Therefore
<pb n='460'/><anchor id='Pg460'/>
the original month among both the Babylonians and the
Hebrews consisted of four weeks of seven days each, the last
day of each week being the Sabbath, the <q>day of standstill,</q>
and two days of the new moon.<note place='foot'>See I Sam. XX,
5-27, where the two new-moon days are spoken of as
approaching, proving the use of the Babylonian month of four weeks of seven
days each, and two new-moon days.</note> Both the new moon and full
moon were special days of celebration,<note place='foot'>II Kings IV,
23; Prov. VII, 20; comp. Ps. LXXXI, 4, <hi rend='italic'>Kese</hi>.</note> and later two
other Sabbath days were added between them to correspond to the
four phases of the moon. Still later the week was detached
altogether from the moon and made a fixed period of seven
days, solemnly ended by the Sabbath. Thus Judaism raised
the Sabbath above all dependence on nature and into the realm
of holiness. The Jewish Sabbath became the witness to God,
the Creator ruling above nature in absolute
freedom.<note place='foot'>Ex. XX, 11; Gen. II, 2-3.</note>
</p>

<p>
Still the ancient festival of the new moon was preserved as
an observance in the Temple, and it afterward survived only
in the liturgy of the Synagogue. While ancient Israel had
observed the New Moon as a day of rest even more sacred
than the Sabbath,<note place='foot'>II Kings IV, 23; Isa.
I, 13; LXVI, 23.</note> the Priestly Code placed it among the festivals
only as a day of sacrifice, but as neither a day of rest
nor of popular celebration.<note place='foot'>Num.
XXVIII, 11 f.</note> Beside the recital of the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hallel</foreign>
Psalms and the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Mussaf</foreign>
(<q>additional</q>) prayer in the Synagogue
no religious significance was attached to it in the daily
life of the people. Still the fact that the Jewish calendar was
regulated by the moon, while that of other nations depended
on the solar year, led the rabbis to compare the unique history
of Israel to the course of the moon. As the moon changes
continually, waxing and waning but ever renewing itself after
each decline, so Israel renews itself after every fall; while the
proud nations of the world, which count their year by the
course of the sun, rise and set, as it does, with no hope of
<pb n='461'/><anchor id='Pg461'/>
renewal.<note place='foot'>Mek. Bo I; Pes. R. XV; P. d.
R. El. LI; Sanh. 42 a; Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>,
292.</note> At the same time, assurance was found in the prophetic
words that <q>the light of the moon shall be as the light
of the sun and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold as the
light of the seven days</q> and <q>thy (Israel's) sun shall no more
go down, neither shall thy moon withdraw itself, for the Lord
shall be thine everlasting light.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. XXX, 26; LX, 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. The various Jewish festivals, like the Sabbath, were
detached from their original relation to nature and turned
into historical memorials, eloquent testimonies to the great
works of God and of Israel's power of rejuvenation. The
Passover was originally the spring festival of the shepherds
when they hallowed the thresholds,<note place='foot'>Ex.
XII, 11-27; Deut, XVI, 1; see the commentaries, also Clay Trumbull:
<hi rend='italic'>The Threshold Covenant</hi>; Curtiss,
l. c.</note> but was later identified
with the agricultural Feast of Unleavened Bread in Palestine,
and at an early period was further transformed into a festival
of redemption. The former rites of consecration of tent
and herd were taken as symbols of the wondrous deliverance
of the Hebrews from the Egyptian yoke. The sacrifice of
the <q>passing over the threshold,</q> with the sprinkling of the
blood on the doorposts and lintels of each house, observed
each spring exactly as is still done among the semi-pagan
inhabitants of Syria and Arabia, was reinterpreted. According
to the Mosaic code it indicated the wondrous passing of
the angel of death over the thresholds of the Israelites in
Egypt, while he entered the homes of the Egyptians to slay
the first-born and avenge the wrongs of Israel.<note place='foot'>In
Deut. the Passover sacrifice was the first-born of the flock, see Deut.
XVI, 2, comp. with Ex. XIII, 2-16, and the celebration took place on the
night of the new moon. The Priestly Code observed it on the full moon, with
a lamb instead of the first-born sheep or cattle. Ex. XII, 3 f.; Lev, XXIII, 5
(the Holiness Code); Josh. V, 10.</note> Likewise
the cakes of bread without leaven (the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Mazzoth</foreign>) baked for
<pb n='462'/><anchor id='Pg462'/>
the festival were taken as reminders of the hasty exodus
of the fathers from the land of oppression. Thus the spring
festival became a memorial of the springtime of liberty for
the nation and at the same time a consecration of the Jewish
home to the covenant God of Israel. God was to enter the
Jewish home as He did in Egypt, as the Redeemer and Protector
of Israel. Young and old listened with perennial interest
to the story of the deliverance, offering praise for the
wonders of the past and voicing their confidence in the future
redemption from oppression and woe.
</p>

<p>
However burdensome the Passover minutiæ, especially in
regard to the prohibition of leaven, became to the Jewish household,
the predominant feature was always an exuberance of
joy. In the darkest days of medievalism the synagogue and
home resounded with song and thanksgiving, and the young
imbibed the joy and comfort of their elders through the beautiful
symbols of the feast and the richly adorned tale of
the deliverance (the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Haggadah</foreign>).
The Passover feast with its
<q>night of divine watching</q> endowed the Jew ever anew with
endurance during the dark night of medieval tyranny, and
with faith in <q>the Keeper of Israel who slumbereth not nor
sleepeth.</q><note place='foot'>About the watch-night, see
Jubilees XLVIII, 5; Pesah. 109 b.</note> Moreover, as the springtide of nature fills each
creature with joy and hope, so Israel's feast of redemption
promises the great day of liberty to those who still chafe under
the yoke of oppression. The modern Jew is beginning to see
in the reawakening of his religious and social life in western
lands the token of the future liberation of all mankind.<note place='foot'>See
Einhorn's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerbook</hi>, 485; Holdheim:
<hi rend='italic'>Prediglen</hi>, 1853, II, 189,
referring to Jer. XXIII, 7-8; Tos. Ber. I, 12; Ber. 12 b.</note> The
Passover feast brings him the clear and hopeful message of
freedom for humanity from all bondage of body and of spirit.
</p>

<p>
10. The Feast of Weeks or Festival of the First Fruits
in Biblical times was merely a farmer's holiday at the end of
<pb n='463'/><anchor id='Pg463'/>
the seven weeks of harvest. At the beginning of the harvest
parched grains of barley were offered, while at its end two
loaves of the new wheat flour were brought as a thank-offering
for the new crop.<note place='foot'>Ex. XXIII, 16; XXXIV,
22; Deut. XVI, 9; Lev. XXIII, 10-17.</note> Rabbinical Judaism, however, transformed
it into a historical feast by making it the memorial
day of the giving of the Ten Words on Mount Sinai. It was
thus given a universal significance, as the Midrash has it,
<q>turning the Feast of the First Fruits into a festival commemorating
the ripening of the first fruits of the spiritual
harvest for the people of the covenant.</q><note place='foot'>Ex.
R. XXXI, 17, with reference to Ex. XIX, 1; Jubilees VI, 17-21.</note> Henceforth the Ten
Words were to be solemnly read to the congregation on that
day, and the pledge of loyalty made by the fathers thereby
renewed each year by Israel's faithful sons. The leaders of
Reform Judaism surrounded the day with new charm by the
introduction of the confirmation ceremony,<note place='foot'>See
J. E., art. Confirmation.</note> thus rendering
it a feast of consecration of the Jewish youth to the ancient
covenant, of yearly renewal of loyalty by the rising generation
to the ancestral faith.
</p>

<p>
11. The main festival in Biblical times was the Feast of
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Sukkoth</foreign>,
or Tabernacles, the great harvest festival of autumn,
when the people flocked to the central sanctuary in solemn
procession, carrying palms and other plants. Hence this
was called the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hag</foreign>
or Pilgrimage Feast.<note place='foot'>Deut. XVI, 13; Lev.
XXIII, 34-43; comp. I Kings VIII, 65; Ezek.
XLV, 23; R. h. Sh. I, 2.</note> In the post-exilic
Priestly Code this festival also was made historical, and the
name Feast of Sukkoth (which denoted originally Feast of
Pilgrimage Tents) was connected with the exodus from Egypt,
when the town of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Sukkoth</foreign>
(possibly named from the tents of
their encampment) was made the rallying point of the fugitive
Hebrews at their departure from Egypt. The commentators
no longer understood this connection, and traced
<pb n='464'/><anchor id='Pg464'/>
the name to the tents erected by the people in their wanderings
through the wilderness.<note place='foot'>See Ex. XII,
37; XIII, 20; Num. XXXIII, 5, and comp. Mek. Bo 14;
<hi rend='italic'>Sifra</hi> Emor XVII.</note> It seems that from very ancient
times popular rites were performed at this feast, which took a
specially solemn form in the holding of a procession from the
pool of Shiloah at the foot of the Temple mount to the altar
in the Temple, to offer there a libation of water, which was a
sort of symbolic prayer for rain for the opening year. Obviously,
it is this feast which is referred to in the last chapter
of Zechariah, while this outburst of popular joy found a deep
response among the pious leaders of the people and is echoed
in the liturgy of the medieval Synagogue.<note place='foot'>Zech.
XIV, 16-19; comp. Is. XII, 3; Suk. V, 1-4; Tos. Suk. IV, 1-9;
<hi rend='italic'>Piyut</hi> to the Sukkoth festival.</note> The Halakic
rules concerning the tabernacle and the four plans for it
tended to obscure the real significance of the
festival;<note place='foot'>Suk. I-IV; Talmud and Codes.</note> yet
in the synagogue and the home it retained its original character
as a <q>season of gladness.</q> The joyous gratitude to
God for His protection of Israel during the forty years of
wanderings through the wilderness expanded into thanksgiving
for His guidance throughout the forty centuries of Israel's
pilgrimage through all lands and ages. This joy culminated
on the last day in the Feast of Rejoicing in the Law, when
the annual cycle of readings from the Pentateuch was completed
in the Synagogue amid overflowing pride in the possession
of God's law by Israel.<note place='foot'>Ibn Yarchi:
<hi rend='italic'>Manhig</hi>, H. Suk. 53-60; T. O. Ch. DCLXIX; J. E., art.
Simhath Torah.</note> The rabbis gave Sukkoth a universal
significance by taking the seventy bullocks prescribed
for the seven days as offerings for the salvation of the seventy
nations of the world, while the one bullock offered on the last day
suggested the uniqueness of Israel as God's peculiar
people.<note place='foot'>Pesik. 193 b; Suk. 55 b; Philo:
De Victimis, I, 2, II, 238-239.</note>
</p>

<pb n='465'/><anchor id='Pg465'/>

<p>
12. The highest point of religious devotion in the synagogue
is reached on the New Year's day and the Day of Atonement
preceding the Feast of Sukkoth. These are first mentioned
in the Priestly Code and were undoubtedly instituted
after the time of Ezra;<note place='foot'>Lev. XXIII,
24-32; comp. Neh. VIII, 1-18.</note> they were then brought into closer
connection by the Pharisees and permeated with lofty ideas
which struck the deepest chords of the human heart and
voiced the sublimest truths of religion for all time to come.
</p>

<p>
The New Year's Day on the first of Tishri appears in the
Mosaic Code simply as the memorial <q>Day of the Blowing of
the Trumpet,</q> because of the increased number of trumpet
blasts to usher in the seventh or Sabbatical month with its
great pilgrim feast. Under Babylonian influence, however,
it received a new name and meaning. The Babylonian New
Year was looked upon as a heavenly day of destiny when the
fates of all beings on earth and in heaven were foretold for
the whole year from the tables of destiny. The leaders of
Jewish thought also adopted the first day of the holy month
of Tishri as a day of divine judgment, when God allots to each
man his destiny for the year according to his record of good
and evil deeds in the book of life.<note place='foot'>J. E.,
art. New Year's Day; Life, Book of.</note> Accordingly, the stirring
notes of the Shofar were to strike the hearts of the people
with fear, that they might repent of their sins and improve
their ways during the new year. As fixed by tradition, the
liturgy contained three blasts of the Shofar to proclaim
three great ideas of Judaism:<note place='foot'>R. h. Sh. IV, 6-7;
Tos. R. h. Sh. IV, 4-9; R. h. Sh. 27 a; Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>,
247-254, and Abrahams Ann. CXCV, 111 f.; and <hi rend='italic'>Union Prayer Book</hi>,
II, 70-75.</note> the recognition of God as
King of the world; as Judge, remembering the actions and
thoughts of men and nations for their reward and punishment;
and as the Ruler of history, who revealed Himself to Israel
in the trumpet-blasts of Sinai and will gather all men and
<pb n='466'/><anchor id='Pg466'/>
nations by the trumpet-blasts of the Judgment Day at the
end of time.
</p>

<p>
The main purpose of the New Year was to render it a day
of renewal of the heart, so that man might put himself in harmony
with the great Judge on high and receive life anew from
His hand, while he fills his spirit with new and better resolves
for the future. Judaism does not place the day of judgment
after death, when repentance is beyond reach and the sinner
can only await damnation, as is done by Christianity after
the apocalyptic views adopted from the Parsees. The Jewish
judgment day occurs at the beginning of every year, a
day of self-examination and improvement of men before God.
On this day&mdash;in the orthodox Synagogue on the second day
of the New Year&mdash;the chapter is read from the Torah describing
Abraham's great act of faith on Mount Moriah, the
heroic pattern of Jewish martyrdom, and stirring prayers,
litanies, and songs prepare the worshiper for the <q>great
day</q> of the year, the Day of Atonement, which is to come
on the tenth day of Tishri, the last of the ten Days of
Repentance.
</p>

<p>
13. The Day of Atonement figures in the Mosaic Code as
the day when the high priest in the Temple performed the
important function of expiation for the sanctuary, the priesthood,
and the people. The mass of the people were to observe
the day from evening to evening as a Sabbath and a fast day
to obtain pardon for their sins before God.<note place='foot'>Lev.
XVI, 2-34; comp. Ezek. XLV, 18-20.</note> A very primitive
rite which survived for this day was the selection of two goats,
one of which was to be sent to Azazel, the demon of the wilderness,
to bear away the sins of the people, while the other
was to be offered to the Lord as a sacrifice. We learn from
the Mishnaic sources that the sending forth of the scapegoat
was accompanied by strange practices betraying intense popular
interest, and its arrival at the bottom of the wild ravine,
<pb n='467'/><anchor id='Pg467'/>
where Azazel was supposed to dwell, was announced by signals
from station to station, until they reached the Temple mount,
and the news of it was then received with wild bursts of
joy by the people. The young men and maidens assembled
on the heights of Jerusalem, like the men at the pilgrimage
feast at Shiloh, and held, as it were, nuptial dances.<note place='foot'>Yoma
VI; Kalish's commentary to Lev. XVI; Taan. IV, 8; comp. Jud.
XXI, 21; see Morgenstern in Journal Oriental Soc., 1917, and J.Q.R. 1917,
p. 94.</note> The day
was one of communion with God for the high-priest alone;
he confessed his sins and those of the people and implored
forgiveness, and it was actually believed that he beheld the
Majesty of God on that day when he entered the Holy of
Holies with the incense shrouding his face.<note place='foot'>Yoma
IV-VI; comp. Lev. R. XXI, 11; V, 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
In contrast to this priestly monopoly of service with its
external and archaic forms of expiation, the founders of the
Synagogue invested the Day of Atonement with a higher
meaning in accord with the spirit of the prophets of old, the
doctrine of God's mercy and paternal love. Atonement could
no longer be obtained by the priest with the sacrificial blood,
the incense, or the scapegoat; it must come through the
repentance of the sinner, leading him back from the path of
error to the way of God. As the high-priest in the Temple,
so now every son of Israel was to spend the day in the house
of prayer, confessing his sins before God with a contrite heart,
awaiting with awe the realization of God's promise to Moses:
<q>I have pardoned according to thy word.</q><note place='foot'>Num.
XIV, 20; XV, 26.</note> Indeed, a forward
step in the history of religion is represented in the interpretation
of the verse: <q>For on this day <emph>he</emph>&mdash;that
is, the high-priest&mdash;shall
make atonement for you to cleanse you,</q>
which was now understood to refer to God: <q>He shall make
atonement for you through this day.</q><note place='foot'>Lev. XVI, 30;
<hi rend='italic'>Sifra</hi> Ahare VI; Yoma 30 b; Yer. Yoma
V, 42 c.</note> Therefore R. Akiba
<pb n='468'/><anchor id='Pg468'/>
could exclaim proudly, as he thought of the Paulinian doctrine
of vicarious atonement: <q>Happy are ye Israelites!
Before whom do you cleanse yourselves from sin, and who
cleanses you? Your Father in heaven!</q><note place='foot'>Yoma VIII, 9.</note> No
mediator was needed between man and his heavenly Father from the
moment that each individual learned to approach God in true
humility on the Day of Atonement, imploring His pardon
for sin and promising to amend his ways. With profound
intuition the rabbis attributed God's pardon to the petition
of Moses, saying that He revealed Himself in His attribute
of mercy on the very tenth of Tishri, foreshadowing for all
time the divine forgiveness of sin on the Day of Atonement.<note place='foot'>P.
d. R. El. XLVI; Taan. 30 b; B. B. 121 a; S. Olam R. VI; T. d. El.
Zutta IV; Ex. R. LI, 4. Jubilees XXXIV, 18-19 connects the Day of Atonement
with the repentance of Joseph's brethren.</note>
</p>

<p>
As the Mishnah expressly states, even the Day of Atonement
cannot bring forgiveness so long as injustice cleaves
to one's hand or evil speech to the lips and no attempt is
made to repair the injury and appease one's
fellow-man.<note place='foot'>Yoma, l. c.</note>
Where justice is lacking, divine love cannot exert its saving
power. God's mercy and long-suffering cannot remove sin,
unless the root of evil is removed from the heart and every
wrong redressed in sincere repentance. The spirit of God
is invoked on these great days at the year's commencement
only that the penitent soul may thus receive strength to
improve its ways, that good conduct in the future may
atone for the errors of the past. Surely no religion in the
world can equal the sublime teachings of the New Year's day
and the Day of Atonement, first filling the heart of mortal
man with awe before the Judge of the world and then cheering
it with the assurance of God's paternal love being ever ready
to extend mercy to His repentant children. While the other
festivals of the year are specifically Jewish in historic associations
<pb n='469'/><anchor id='Pg469'/>
and meaning, these two days on the threshold of each
new year are universally human, and the chief prayers for
this day are of a universal character, appealing to every human
heart. Indeed, it is characteristic that both the concluding
service for the day, the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Neilah</foreign>,
and the Scriptural reading of the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Minhah</foreign>
Service, selected from the book of Jonah, tell
that God's all-forgiving mercy extends to the non-Jewish
world as well as to the Jew.<note place='foot'>Comp. above, Chapter
<ref target='Chapter_XXXIX'>XXXIX</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
14. Altogether, the Synagogue gave to the annual cycle
of the Jewish life a beautiful rhythm in its alternation of joy
and sorrow, lending a higher solemnity to general experience.
All the festivals mentioned above were preceded by a series
of Sabbaths to prepare the congregation for the coming of
the sad or the joyful season with its historical reminiscences.
So the memorial day of the destruction of Jerusalem, the
ninth of Ab, had three weeks previously to herald in a day
commemorating the siege of Jerusalem, the seventeenth of
Tammuz; but it had also seven Sabbath days to follow,
which afforded words of consolation and hope of a more glorious
future for the mourning nation.<note place='foot'>Josephus
J. W. VI, 4, 5; Meg. Taan. V; Taan. IV, 4; Taan. 12 a, 29 ab.
J. E., art. Ab, Ninth of; see also Pes. R. XXVI-XXXIII;
Pesik. 110 b-148 a.</note> Of course, the brighter
days of the present era have greatly modified the lugubrious
character of these eventful days of the past, even in those
circles where the hope for the restoration of the Jewish nation
and Temple is still expressed in prayer. At the same time,
the commemoration of the destruction of State and Temple,
the great turning-point in the history of the Jew, ought to
be given a prominent place in the Reform Synagogue as
well, though celebrated in the spirit of progressive Judaism.
</p>

<p>
The feast of Hanukkah with its lights and song, jubilant
with the Maccabean victory in the battle for Israel's faith,
still resounds in the Jewish home and the house of God with
<pb n='470'/><anchor id='Pg470'/>
the prophetic watchword: <q>Not by might, nor by power, but
by My spirit, saith the Lord of Hosts.</q><note place='foot'>Zech.
IV, 6; J. E., art. Hanukka; Maccabees.</note>
</p>

<p>
The mirthful feast of Purim, with its half-serious, half-jovial
use of the scroll of Esther and its popular rejoicing,
assumed in the course of time a more earnest character,
because the plot of Haman and the rescue of the Jews
became typical in Jewish history. Therefore the story of
Amalek, the arch-foe of Israel, is read in the Synagogue on
the preceding Sabbath as a reminder of the constant battle
which Israel must wage for its supreme religious task.<note place='foot'>Meg.
IV, 5; 18 a, 21 b; J. E., art. Purim; Esther; Sifre to Deut. 296.</note>
</p>

<p>
15. Through the entire history of Judaism since the Exile,
the Synagogue brought its religious truth home to the people
each Sabbath and holy day through the reading and expounding
of the Torah and the prophets. These words of
consolation and admonition struck a deep chord in the hearts
of the people, so that learning was the coveted prize of all
and ignorance of the law became a mark of inferiority. Beside
these stated occasions, all times of joy or sadness such as
weddings and funerals were given some attention in the Synagogue,
as linking the individual to the communal life, and
linking his personal joy and sorrow with the past sadness and
future glory of Jerusalem, as if they but mirrored the greater
events of the people. Thus the whole life was to be placed
in the service of the social body, and could not be torn asunder
or divided into things holy and things profane. Religion
must send forth its rays like the sun, illumining and warming
all of man's deeds and thoughts.
</p>

<p>
16. The weakness of the Synagogue was its Orientalism.
Amid all the changes of time and environment, it remained
separated from the surrounding world to such an extent that
it could no longer exert an influence to win outsiders for its
great truths. Until recently the Hebrew language was retained
<pb n='471'/><anchor id='Pg471'/>
for the entire liturgy, although it had become unintelligible
to the majority of the Jews in western lands, and
even though the rabbis had declared in Talmudic times that
the verse: <q>Hear O Israel, the Lord is our God, the Lord
is One</q> indicates that the words should be spoken in a language
which can be heard and understood by the people.<note place='foot'>Ber. 13 a.</note>
The Torah likewise was, and in the ancient Synagogue is still
read exclusively in the Hebrew original, in spite of the fact
that the original reading under Ezra was accompanied by
a translation and interpretation in the Aramaic vernacular.
Thus only could the Torah become <q>the heritage of the whole
congregation of Jacob,</q> which fact gave rise to both the
Aramaic and Greek translations of the Bible which carried
the truths of Judaism to the wider circle of the world. These
plain facts were ignored through the centuries to the detriment
of the Jewish faith, and this neglect, in turn, engendered
a false conception of Judaism, making it seem ever more
exclusive and narrow. Instead of becoming <q>our wisdom
and understanding before all the nations,</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
IV, 6.</note> knowledge of
the Torah dwindled to a possession of the few, while the
ceremonial laws, observed by the many, were performed
without any understanding of their origin or purpose. But
in the last century under the banner of Reform Judaism many
of these points were altered. The vernacular was introduced
into the Synagogue, so that the modern Jew might pray in the
same tongue in which he feels and thinks, thus turning the
prayers from mechanical recitations into true offerings of the
soul, and bringing the Scriptural readings nearer to the consciousness
of the congregation. Likewise the reintroduction
of the sermon in the vernacular as part of the divine service
for Sabbath and holy days became the vehicle to awaken
religious sentiments in the hearts of the people, and thereby
to revive the spirit of the ancient prophets and
Haggadists.<note place='foot'>See Zunz: <hi rend='italic'>Gottesdienstliche
Vortraege</hi>.</note>
</p>

<pb n='472'/><anchor id='Pg472'/>

<p>
17. This Orientalism is especially marked in the attitude of
the older Synagogue to women. True enough, woman was
honored as the mistress of the home. She kindled the Sabbath
light, provided for the joy and comfort of domestic life,
especially on the holy days, observed strictly the laws of diet
and purity, and awakened the spirit of piety in her children.
Still she was excluded from the regular divine service in the
Synagogue. She did not count as a member of the religious
community, which consisted exclusively of men. She had
to sit in the gallery behind a trellis during the service and could
not even join the men in saying grace at table. A few rare
women were privileged to study Hebrew, such as the daughter
of Rashi, but as a rule woman's education was neglected as
if <q>she had no claim on any other wisdom than the distaff.</q><note place='foot'>Yoma
66 b; comp. R. Eliezer's other dictum, Sota III, 4.</note>
More and more Judaism lost sight of its noble types of women
in antiquity; it forgot the Biblical heroines such as Miriam
and Deborah, Hannah and Hulda, and Talmudic ones such
as Beruria the wife of Rabbi Meir. Such women as these
might have repeated the words: <q>Hath the Lord indeed
spoken only through Moses? Hath He not also spoken
through us?</q><note place='foot'>Num. XII, 2.</note>
Aside from the sphere of religion, in which
woman always manifests a splendid wealth of sentiment, she
was held in subjection by Oriental laws in both marital and
social relations,<note place='foot'>See Geiger's <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschr.</hi>,
1836, 1 f., 354; 1839, 333 f.</note> and her natural vocation as religious teacher of
the children in the home failed to receive full recognition also.
</p>

<p>
The first attempt to liberate the Jewish woman from the
yoke of Orientalism was made in the eleventh century by
Rabbi Gershon ben Jehudah of Mayence, at that time the
leading rabbi of Germany. Under the influence of Occidental
ideas he secured equal rights for men and women in
marriage.<note place='foot'>Graetz, <hi rend='italic'>H. J.</hi> III, 244 f.;
L. Loew: <hi rend='italic'>Ges. Sch.</hi> III, 57.</note>
But only in our own time were full rights accorded her in the
<pb n='473'/><anchor id='Pg473'/>
Synagogue, owing to the reform movement in Germany and
Austria. As a matter of fact, the confirmation of children
of both sexes, which was gradually introduced in many conservative
congregations also, was the virtual recognition of
woman as the equal of man in Synagogue and school.<note place='foot'>See Landsberg
in J. E., art. Confirmation; L. Loew: <hi rend='italic'>Lebensalter</hi>, 17.</note>
Finally, upon the initiative of Isaac M. Wise, then Rabbi in Albany,
N. Y., family pews were introduced in the American
Synagogue and woman was seated beside her husband, son,
father, and brother as their equal. With her greater emotional
powers she is able to lend a new solemnity and dignity to the
religious and educational efforts of the Synagogue, wherever
she is admitted as a full participant in the service.
</p>

<p>
18. Another shortcoming of the Synagogue and of Rabbinical
Judaism in general was its formalism. Too much stress was
laid upon the perfunctory <q>discharge of duty,</q> the outward
performance of the letter of the law, and not enough upon
the spiritual basis of the Jewish religion. The form obscured
the spirit, even though it never quite succeeded in throttling
it. This formalism of the ignorant, but observant multitude
was censured as early as the eleventh century by Bahya ben
Joseph ibn Pakudah in his <q>Duties of the Heart,</q> a philosophical
work in which he emphatically urges the need of inwardness
for the Jewish faith.<note place='foot'>See his Introduction.</note>
Later the mystics of Germany
and Palestine, while strong supporters of the law, opposed
the one-sidedness of legalism and intellectualism, and endeavored
to instill elements of deeper devotion into the Jewish
soul through the introduction of their secret lore,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Cabbalah</foreign>,
or <q>esoteric tradition.</q><note place='foot'>Comp. Schechter:
<hi rend='italic'>Studies</hi>, II, 148 f., 202 f.</note> Their offering, however, was
anything but beneficial to the soul of Judaism. A mysticism
which attempts to fathom the unfathomable depth of the
divine accords but ill with the teaching of Judaism, which
says: <q>The secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but
<pb n='474'/><anchor id='Pg474'/>
the things that are revealed belong unto us and to our children
forever, that we may do all the words of this
law.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XXIX, 28.</note> The
Cabbalah was but the reaction to the excessive rationalism
of the Spanish-Arabic period. As the ultimate source of
religion is not reason but the heart, so the cultivation of the
intellect at the expense of the emotions can be only harmful
to the faith. The legalism and casuistry of the Talmud and
the Codes appealed too much to the intellect, disregarding
the deeper emotional sources of religion and morality; on
the other hand, the mysticism of the Cabbalists overemphasized
the emotional element, and eliminated much of the rational
basis of Judaism. True religion grasps the whole of
man and shows God's world as a harmonious whole, reflecting
in both mind and heart the greatness and majesty of God
on high. In order to open the flood-gates of the soul and render
religion again the deepest and strongest force of life, the
Synagogue must revitalize its time-honored institutions and
ceremonies. Thus only will they become real powers of the
Jewish spirit, testimonies to the living God, witnessing to the
truth of the Biblical words: <q>For this commandment which
I command thee this day, it is not too hard for thee, neither
is it too far off. It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say,
<q>Who shall go up for us to heaven and bring it unto us, and
make us to hear it, that we may do it?</q> Neither is it beyond
the sea, that thou shouldest say, <q>Who shall go over the sea
for us and bring it unto us, and make us to hear it, that we
may do it?</q> But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy
mouth and in thy heart, that thou mayest do
it.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XXX, 11-14.</note>
</p>

<p>
19. The Synagogue need no longer restrict itself to the
ancient forms of worship in its appeal to the Jewish soul.
It must point to the loftiest ideals for the future of all humanity,
if it is to be true to its prophetic spirit of yore. <q>My
house shall be called a house of prayer for all peoples,</q> exclaimed
<pb n='475'/><anchor id='Pg475'/>
the seer of the exile.<note place='foot'>Isa. LVI, 7.</note>
<q>Hear O Israel, the Lord our
God, the Lord is one</q> must be echoed in all lands and languages,
by all God-seeking minds and hearts, to realize the
prophetic vision: <q>And the Lord shall be King over all the
earth; in that day the Lord shall be One, and His name
One.</q><note place='foot'>Zech. XIV, 9.</note>
Just as there is but one truth, one justice, and one love, however
differently the various races and classes of men may
conceive them, so Israel shall uphold God, the only One, as
the bond of unity for all men, despite their diversity of ideas
and cultures, and His truth will be the beacon-light for all
humanity. As the Psalms, prophets, and the opening chapters
of the Pentateuch speak a language appealing to the
common sense of mankind, so the divine worship of the Synagogue
must again strike the deeper chords of humanity, in
its weal and woe, its hope and fear, its aspirations and ideals.
Therefore it is not enough that the institutions and ceremonies
of the Synagogue are testimonies to the great past of Israel.
They must also become eloquent heralds and monitors of the
glorious future, when all mankind will have learned the lessons
of the Jewish festivals, the ideals of liberty, law, and peace,
the thoughts of the divine judgment and the divine mercy.
They must help also to bring about the time when the ideal
of social justice, which the Mosaic Code holds forth for the
Israelitish nation, will have become the motive-power and
incentive to the reëstablishment of human society upon new
foundations.
</p>

<p>
Jehudah ha Levi, the lofty poet of medieval
Jewry,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cuzari</hi>, I, 103; II, 12.</note> speaks
of Israel as the <q>heart of humanity,</q> because it has supplied
the spiritual and moral life-blood of the civilized world. Israel
provides continually the rejuvenating influence of society.
Israel's history is the history of the world in miniature. As
the Midrash says,<note place='foot'>Sifre to Deut. VI, 5.</note>
the confession of God's unity imposes
<pb n='476'/><anchor id='Pg476'/>
upon us the obligation to lead all God's children to love Him
with heart and soul and might, thus working toward the time
when <q>the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory
of the Lord as the waters cover the sea.</q><note place='foot'>Hab.
II, 14.</note> All the social,
political, and intellectual movements of our restless, heaven-storming
age, notwithstanding temporary lapses into barbarism
and hatred, point unerringly to the final goal, the
unity of all human and cosmic life under the supreme leadership
of God on high. In the midst of all these movements
of the day stands the Jew, God's witness from of old, yet
vigorous and youthful still, surveying the experiences of the
past and voicing the hope of the future, exclaiming in the
words of his traditional prayers: <q>Happy are we; how goodly
is our portion! how pleasant our lot! how beautiful our
inheritance!</q><note place='foot'>Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>, 8.</note>
Our faith is the faith of the coming humanity;
our hope of Zion is the kingdom of God, which will include all
the ideals of mankind.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='477'/><anchor id='Pg477'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter LIX. The Ethics of Judaism and the Kingdom of God</head>

<p>
1. The soul of the Jewish religion is its ethics. Its God
is the Fountainhead and Ideal of morality. At the beginning
of the summary of the ethical laws in the Mosaic Code
stands the verse: <q>Ye shall be holy, for I the Lord your
God am holy.</q><note place='foot'>Lev. XIX, 2; comp. on the whole
E. G. Hirsch in J. E., art. Ethics.</note> This provides the Jew with the loftiest
possible motive for perfection and at the same time the
greatest incentive to an ever higher conception of life and
life's purpose. Accordingly, the kingdom of God for whose
coming the Jew longs from the beginning until the end of
the year,<note place='foot'>See Alenu in Singer's <hi rend='italic'>Prayerb.</hi>,
67 f.; <hi rend='italic'>Union Prayerbook</hi>, I, 48, 104 f.</note>
does not rest in a world beyond the grave, but
(in consonance with the ideal of Israel's sages and prophets)
in a complete moral order on earth, the reign of truth, righteousness
and holiness among all men and nations. Jewish
ethics, then, derives its sanction from God, the Author and
Master of life, and sees its purpose in the hallowing of all
life, individual and social. Its motive is the splendid conception
that man, with his finite ends, is linked to the infinite
God with His infinite ends; or, as the rabbis express it, <q>Man
is a co-worker with God in the work of creation.</q><note place='foot'>Shab. 119 b.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. Both the term ethics (from the Greek <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>ethos</foreign>)
and morality (from the Latin
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mores</foreign>) are derived from custom or habit.
In distinction to this, the Hebrew Scripture points to God's
will as perceived in the human conscience as the source
of all morality. Those ethical systems which dispense with
<pb n='478'/><anchor id='Pg478'/>
religion fail to take due cognizance of the voice of duty which
says to each man: <q>Thou shalt</q> or <q>Thou shalt not!</q>
Duty distinguishes man from all other creatures. However
low man may be in the scale of freedom, he is moved to
action by an impulse from within, not by a compulsion from
without. Of course, morality must travel a long road from
the primitive code, which does not extend beyond the near
kinsmen, to the ideal of civilized man which encompasses
the world. Still man's steps are always directed by some rule
of duty. The voice of conscience, heard clearly or dimly,
is not, as is so often asserted, the product, but the original
guiding factor of human society. The divine inner power of
morality has made man, not man morality. Morality and
religion, inseparably united in the Decalogue of Sinai, will
attain their perfection together in the kingdom of God upon
the Zion heights of humanity.
</p>

<p>
3. Ethical elements, greater or smaller, enter into all
religions and codes of law of the various nations. Ancient
Egypt, Persia and India even connected ethical principle
and the future of the soul so closely, that certain ethical laws
were to determine one's fate in heaven or hell. This led to
the idea that this life is but the preparatory stage to the great
hereafter. But antiquity also witnessed more or less successful
attempts to emancipate ethics from religion. When the
old beliefs no longer satisfied the thinking mind and no longer
kept men from corruption, various philosophers attempted
to provide general principles of morality as substitutes for
the departed deities. Confucius built up in China a system
of common-sense ethics based upon the communal life, but
without any religious ideals; this satisfied the commonplace
attitude of that country, but could not pass beyond the confines
of the far East. A semi-religious ascetic system was
offered at about the same time by Gautama Buddha of
India, a prince garbed as a mendicant friar, who preached
<pb n='479'/><anchor id='Pg479'/>
the gospel of love and charity for all fellow creatures. His
leading maxims were blind resignation and self-effacement in
the presence of the ills, suffering and death which rule the
entire domain of life. All existence was evil to him, with
its pleasure, passion and desire, its thought and feeling; his
aim was a state of apathy and listlessness,
<foreign rend='italic'>Nirvana</foreign>; while
sympathy and compassion for fellow creatures were to offer
some relief to a life of delusion and despair. The Hindu
conception of the unbearable woe of the world corresponded
more or less with the hot climate, which renders the people
indolent and apathetic. In striking contrast to this was the
vigorous manhood of the ethical systems developed on the
healthy soil of Greece, under the azure canopy of a sky that
fills the soul with beauty and joy. Life should be valued for
the happiness it offers to the individual or to society. The
good should be loved for its beauty, the just admired for its
nobility. Greek ethics was thus both aristocratic and utilitarian;
it took no heed of the toiling slave, the suffering poor,
or the unprotected stranger. Both the Buddhist and the
Hellenic systems lacked the energizing force and motive of
the highest purpose of life, because both have left out of their
purview the great Ruler who summons man to his duty, saying:
<q>I am the Lord thy God; thou shalt and thou shalt
not!</q>
</p>

<p>
4. Between the two extremes, the Hellenic self-expansion
and the Buddhist self-extinction, Jewish ethics labors for
self-elevation under the uplifting power of a holy God. The
term which Scripture uses for moral conduct is, very significantly,
<q>to walk in the ways of God.</q> The rabbis explain
this as follows: <q>As God is merciful and gracious, so be thou
merciful and gracious. As God is called righteous, so be
thou righteous. As God is holy, so do thou strive to be
holy.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XI, 22; Sifre Deut. 49.</note>
Another of their maxims is: <q>How can mortal
<pb n='480'/><anchor id='Pg480'/>
man walk after God, who is an all-consuming fire? What
Scripture means is that man should emulate God. As He
clothes the naked, nurses the sick, comforts the sorrowing,
and buries the dead, so should man.</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
XIII, 5; Sota 14 a; see Schechter: <hi rend='italic'>Aspects</hi>, 200-203.</note>
In other words,
human life must take its pattern from the divine goodness
and holiness.
</p>

<p>
5. Obviously, Jewish ethics had to go through the same
long process of development as the Jewish religion itself.
A very high stage is represented by that disinterested goodness
taught by Antigonus of Soko in the second pre-Christian
century and by ben Azzai in the second century of the present
era, which no longer anticipates reward or punishment, but
does good for its own sake and shuns evil because it is
evil.<note place='foot'>Aboth. I, 3; IV, 2; E. G. Hirsch in J. E.,
art Ethics. See Toy: <hi rend='italic'>Judaism
and Christianity</hi>, p. 260.</note>
As long as the law tolerated slavery, polygamy, and blood
vengeance, and man's personality was not recognized on
principle as being made in the image of God, the practical
morality of the Hebrews could not rise above that of other
nations, except in so far as the shepherd's compassion for
the beast occasioned sympathy also for the fellow-man.
After all, Jewish ethics became the ethics of humanity
because of the God-conception of the prophets,&mdash;the righteous,
merciful, and holy God, the God <q>who executeth the
judgment of the fatherless and the widow, and loveth the
stranger in giving him food and raiment.</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
X, 19.</note> The conception
of Jewish ethics as human ethics is voiced in the familiar
verse: <q>It hath been told thee, O man, what is good and
what the Lord doth require of thee: only to do justly and
to love mercy and to walk humbly with thy God.</q><note place='foot'>Micah VI, 8.</note>
The all-ruling and all-seeing God of the Psalmist made men feel
that only such a one can stand in His holy place <q>who hath
<pb n='481'/><anchor id='Pg481'/>
clean hands and a pure heart, who hath not lifted up his soul
unto falsehood, nor sworn deceitfully.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
XXIV, 3-4.</note> After law-giver,
prophet, and psalmist came the wise, who gave ethics a more
practical and popular character in the wisdom literature,
and then came the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Hasidim</foreign>
or Essenes, who, while seeking
the highest piety or saintliness as life's aim, deepened and
spiritualized their ethical ideals. Some of these considered
the essential principles of morality to be love of God and of
the fellow-man;<note place='foot'>See J. E., art. Essenes,
Hasidim and Test. Twelve Patriarchs: Iss. V, 2;
VII, 6; Dan. V, 3.</note> while rabbinical ethics in general laid great
stress on motive as determining the value of the deed. The
words, <q>Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God,</q> so often repeated
in the law, are taken to mean: Fear Him who looks into the
heart, judging motives and intentions.<note place='foot'>Lev. XIX,
14, 32; <hi rend='italic'>Sifra</hi> ad loc. B. M. 58 b.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. As the Mosaic Code presented the ceremonial and moral
laws together as divine, so the rabbinical schools treated
them all as divine commandments without any distinction.
Hence the Mishnah and the Talmud fail to give ethics the
prominent place it occupies in the prophetic and wisdom
literature of the Bible and did not even make an attempt to
formulate a system of ethics. The ethical rules in the <q>Sayings
of the Fathers</q> and similar later collections make no
pretentions to being general or systematic. The ethical
teachings became conspicuous only through contact with the
Hellenic world in the propaganda literature, with its aim
to win the Gentile world to Judaism. Thus at an early
period handbooks on ethics were written and circulated
in the Greek language, some of which were afterward appropriated
by the Christian Church. This entire movement is
summed up in the well-known answer of Hillel to the heathen
who desired to join the Jewish faith: <q>What is hateful to
<pb n='482'/><anchor id='Pg482'/>
thee, do thou not unto thy fellow man; this is the law, and
all the rest is merely commentary.</q><note place='foot'>Shab. 31 a;
comp. J. E., art. Didache and Klein, l. c.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the whole, rabbinical Judaism elaborated no ethical
system before the Middle Ages. Then, under Mohammedan
influence, the Aristotelian and Neo-Platonic philosophies in
vogue gave rise to certain ethical works more or less in accord
with their philosophic or mystic prototypes. In addition,
ethical treatises were often written in the form of wills
and of popular admonitions, which were sometimes broad
and human, at other times stern and ascetic. One thought,
however, prevailed through the ages: as life emanates from
the God of holiness, so it must ever serve His holy purposes
and benefit all His earthly children. <q>All the laws given
by God to Israel have only the purification and ennobling of
the life of men for their object,</q> say the
rabbis.<note place='foot'>Tanh. Shemini, ed. Buber, § 12; comp. Lauterbach,
<hi rend='italic'>Ethics of Halakah</hi>, p. 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. Perhaps the best summary of Jewish ethics was presented
by Hillel in the famous three words: <q>If I am not
for myself, who will be for me? But if I am for myself alone,
what am I? And if not now, when then?</q><note place='foot'>Aboth.
I, 14.</note> We find here
three spheres of duty: toward one's self, toward others, and
toward the life before us. In contrast to purely altruistic
or socialistic ethics, Jewish morality accentuated the value
of the individual even apart from the social organism. Man
is a child of God, a. self-conscious personality, who is to unfold
and improve the powers implanted by his divine Maker,
in both body and soul, laboring in this way toward the purpose
for which he was created. Man was created single,
says one of the sages in the Mishnah,<note place='foot'>Sanh. IV, 5.</note> that he might
know that he forms a world for himself, and the whole creation
must aid him in unfolding the divine image within himself.
Accordingly, self-preservation, self-improvement and self-perfection
<pb n='483'/><anchor id='Pg483'/>
are duties of every man. This implies first the
care for the human body as the temple which enshrines the
divine spirit. In the eyes of Judaism, to neglect or enfeeble
the body, the instrument of the soul, is altogether sinful.
As the Sabbath law demands physical rest and recreation
after the week's work, so the Jewish religion in general trains
men to enjoy the gifts of God; and the rabbis declare that
their rejection (except for disciplinary reasons) is ingratitude
for which man must give an account at the last Judgment
Day.<note place='foot'>Yer. Kid. IV, 66 d.</note> The Pharisean teacher who opposed the
Essenic custom of fasting and declared it sinful, unless it be for special
purposes, would have deprecated even more strongly the
ascetic Christian or Hindoo saint who castigated his body
as the seat of sin.<note place='foot'>Taan. 22 b; Ned. 10 a.</note> As Hillel remarked:
<q>See what care is bestowed upon the statue of the emperor to keep it clean and
bright; ought we not, likewise, keep God's image, our body,
clean and free from every blemish?</q><note place='foot'>Lev. R. XXXIV,
3, ref. to Prov. XI, 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
In regard to our moral and spiritual selves the rabbinical
maxim is: <q>Beautify thyself first, and then beautify
others.</q><note place='foot'>Sanh. 18 a, 19 a.</note>
Only as we first ennoble ourselves can we then contribute to
the elevation of the world about us. Our industry promotes
the welfare of the community as well as of ourselves; our
idleness harms others as well as ourselves.<note place='foot'>Keth.
V, 5.</note> Upon self-respect
rest our honor and our character. Virtue also is the result
of self-control and self-conquest.<note place='foot'>Prov.
XVI, 32; Shab. 105 b; Ned. 22 b; Sota 4 b; Ber. 43 b.</note> <q>There shall be no strange
God in thee.</q> This Psalm verse is taken by the rabbis to
mean that no anger and passion nor any evil desire or overbearing pride
shall obtain their mastery over thee.<note place='foot'>Ps. LXXXI, 10.</note>
Man asserts himself in braving temptation and trial, in overcoming
sin and grief. Greater still is the hero who, in complete
<pb n='484'/><anchor id='Pg484'/>
self-mastery, can sacrifice himself in a great cause.
Martyrdom for the sake of God, which the rabbis call sanctification
of the name of God,<note place='foot'>See above, chapter
<ref target='Chapter_L_Section_6'>L, par. 6</ref>.</note> is really the assertion of the
divine life in the midst of death. But desertion of life from
selfish motives through suicide is all the more despicable.
He who sells his human birthright to escape pain or disgrace,
though greatly to be pitied, has forfeited his claim and his
share in the world to come.<note place='foot'>Semakot
II; R. Eleazar in B. K. 91 b with reference to Gen. IX, 5. Prof.
Lauterbach referred me to <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Shebet Mussar</foreign>,
XX, obviously a quotation from
some lost Midrash.</note>
</p>

<p>
Not only our life is to be maintained amid all trials as a
sacred trust, but also our rights, our freedom, and our individuality,
for we must not allow our personality to become
the slave or tool of others. Job, who battled for his own convictions
against the false assumption of his friends, was at
last praised and rewarded by God.<note place='foot'>Job XLII, 7.</note> The Biblical
verse: <q>For they are My servants whom I brought forth out of the
land of Egypt, they shall not be sold as slaves,</q> is explained
by the rabbis: <q>My servants, but not servants to servants,</q>
and is thus applicable to spiritual slavery as well.<note place='foot'>Lev.
XXV, 42, 55; Tos. B. K. VII, 5; Kid. 22 d.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. Therefore the Jewish conception of duty to our fellow-men
is by no means comprised in love or benevolence. Long
before Hillel, other Jewish sages gave the so-called Golden
Rule: <q>Love thy neighbor as thyself,</q> a negative form:
<q>What is hateful to thee do not do unto thy fellow
men.</q><note place='foot'>Targ. to Lev. XIX, 18; Tobit IV, 15; Philo II, 236.</note>
Taken in the positive form, the command cannot be literally
carried out. We cannot love the stranger as we love ourselves
or our kin; still less can we love our enemy, as is demanded
by the Sermon on the Mount. According to the
Hebrew Scriptures<note place='foot'>Ex. XXIII, 4-5; Prov. XXIV,
17; XXV, 21.</note> we can and should treat our enemy
<pb n='485'/><anchor id='Pg485'/>
magnanimously and forgive him, but we cannot truly love
him, unless he turns from an enemy to a friend. The real
meaning given by the rabbis to the command, <q>Love thy
neighbor as thyself</q> is: <q>Put thyself in his place and act
accordingly. As thou dost not desire to be robbed of thy
property or good name or to be injured or insulted, so do not
these things unto thy fellow man.</q><note place='foot'>Ab. d R.
N., ed. Schechter, 53, 60.</note> They then take the
closing words, <q>I am the Lord thy God,</q> as an oath by God:
<q>I am the Lord, the Creator of thy fellow man as well as of
thee; therefore, if thou showest love to him, I shall surely
reward thee, and if not, I am the Judge ready to punish
thee.</q><note place='foot'>Eodem, 64.</note>
Love of all fellow-men is, in fact, taught by both
Hillel<note place='foot'>Aboth. I, 12.</note> and
Philo.<note place='foot'>Philo II, 284 f.</note> Love and helpful sympathy are implied
also by the verse from Deuteronomy: <q>He (the Lord) loveth
the stranger in giving him bread and raiment. Love ye
therefore the stranger.</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
X, 18-19.</note> All members of the human household
are dependent on each other for kindness and good will,
whether we are rich or poor, high or lowly, in life or in death;
so do we owe love and kindness to all men alike.
</p>

<p>
9. However, love as a principle of action is not sufficiently
firm to fashion human conduct or rule society. It is too
much swayed by impulse and emotion and is often too partial.
Love without justice leads to abuse and wrong, as
we see in the history of the Church, which began with the
principle of love, but often failed to heed the admonitions of
justice. Therefore justice is the all-inclusive principle of human
conduct in the eyes of Judaism. Justice is impartial by
its very nature. It must right every wrong and vindicate the
cause of the oppressed. <q>When Thy judgments are in the
earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness,</q>
said the prophet,<note place='foot'>Isa. XXVI, 9.</note> describing
the just man as he <q>that walketh
<pb n='486'/><anchor id='Pg486'/>
righteously and speaketh uprightly, that despiseth the
gain of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from holding of
bribes, that stoppeth his ear from hearing of blood, and
shutteth his eyes from looking on evil.</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
XXXIII, 15.</note> Justice is the requisite
not only in action, but also in
disposition,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sifra</hi> Behar IV;
B. M. 58 b.</note> implying
honesty in intention as in deed, uprightness in speech and
mien, perfect rectitude, neither taking advantage of ignorance
nor abusing confidence.<note place='foot'>Tos. B. K. VII, 8; B. M. III,
27; B. B. 88 a-90 b; Makk. 24 a.</note> It is sinful to acquire wealth
by betting or gambling,<note place='foot'>Sanh. 24 b.</note>
or by cornering food-supplies to
raise the market price.<note place='foot'>B. B. 90 b.</note>
The rabbis derive from Scripture
the thought that, just as <q>your balances and weights, your
ephah and hin</q> must be just, so should your yea and
nay.<note place='foot'>Lev. XIX, 36; B. M. 49 a.</note>
The verse, <q>Justice, justice shalt them follow,</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
XVI, 20.</note> is explained
thus in a Midrash which is quoted by Bahya ben Asher of
the thirteenth century: <q>Justice, whether to your profit or
loss, whether in word or in action, whether to Jew or
non-Jew.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Kad ha Kemah</hi>,
s. v. <hi rend='italic'>Gezelah</hi>.</note>
This category of justice covers also regard for the
honor of our fellow-men, lest we harm it by the tongue of the
back-biter,<note place='foot'>Ps. XV, 3.</note>
by the ear that listens to calumny,<note place='foot'>Pes. 118 a.</note> or by suspicion
cast upon the innocent.<note place='foot'>Shab. 97 a; Yoma
19 b.</note> <q>God in His law takes
especial care of the honor of our fellow-men,</q> say the rabbis,
and <q>he who publicly puts his fellow man to shame forfeits
his share in the world to come.</q><note place='foot'>Mek.
Mishpatim 82; B. K. 79 b; B. M. 58 b-59 a; Lauterbach l. c.
20-21.</note>
</p>

<p>
10. But the Jewish conception of justice is broader than
mere abstention from hurting our fellow-men. Justice is a
positive conception. Righteousness (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Zedakah</foreign>)
includes also charity and philanthropy. It asserts the claim of the poor
upon the rich, of the helpless upon him who possesses the
<pb n='487'/><anchor id='Pg487'/>
means to help. <q>He who prevents the poor from reaping
the corners of the field or the gleanings of the harvest, or in
any way withholds that which has been assigned them by
the law of Moses, is a robber,</q> says the Mishnah, <q>for it is
written: <q>Remove not the old landmark, and enter not into
the field of the fatherless.</q></q><note place='foot'>Peah
V, 6; Prov. XXIII, 10.</note> Jewish ethics holds that
charity is not a gift of condescending love, but a duty. It
is incumbent upon the fortunate to rescue the unfortunate,
since all that we possess is only lent to us by God, the Owner
of the world, with the charge that we provide for the needy
who are under His special protection. Those who refuse to
give the poor their share abuse the divine trust. <q>If thou
lendest money to My people, to the poor with thee,</q><note place='foot'>Ex.
XXIII, 24.</note> says
Scripture, and the rabbis comment on this to the effect that
<q>the poor are called God's people; do not forget that the
turn of fortune which made you rich and them poor may
turn, and that you may then be in need.</q><note place='foot'>Tanh.
Mishpatim. ed. Buber, 8.</note> Nor is it sufficient
merely to give to him who is poor; we are bidden to uphold
him when his powers fail.<note place='foot'>Lev. XXV, 35; Sifra ad loc.</note>
</p>

<p>
This is the very principle of ethics of the Mosaic law, the
principle for which the great prophets fought with all the
vigor and vehemence of the divine spirit&mdash;social justice.
The cry: <q>Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay
field to field, till there be no room,</q><note place='foot'>Isa. V, 8.</note> the
condemnation of those <q>that swallow the needy and destroy the poor of the
land,</q><note place='foot'>Amos VIII, 4.</note>
the curse hurled at him who withholdeth corn,<note place='foot'>Prov. XI, 26.</note>
laid the foundations of a higher justice, which is not satisfied
with mitigating the misery of the unfortunate by acts of
charity, but insists on a readjustment of the social conditions
which create poverty. This spirit created the poor laws of
the Mosaic Code, which were partially adopted by both
<pb n='488'/><anchor id='Pg488'/>
Christians and Mohammedans. It dictated the Mosaic
institutions of the seventh year of release and the Jubilee
year for the restoration of fields and houses, to prevent the
tyranny of wealth from becoming a permanent source of
oppression. While these were scarcely ever put into practice,
they remained as a protest and an appeal. Their aim
and permanent influence tended toward relations between
the upper and lower classes, which would insure the latter
some degree of independence and dignity. In fact, the
foundations laid by the Hebrew Scripture underlie all our
great modern efforts to turn the forces of charity so as to check
the sources of evil in our social organism. Modern philanthropy,
taking its clue from the old Hebrew ideal, aims not
to alleviate but to cure, and to stimulate the natural good in
society, material, moral and intellectual, that it may overcome
the evil. We are recognizing more and more the principle
of mutual responsibility and interdependence of men
and classes. Yet this very principle, modern as it seems,
was recognized by the Jewish sages, as we see in the remarkable
passage where the rabbis comment on the law concerning
the case of a slain body found in the field, with the murderer
unknown. The Bible commands that in such a case the
elders of the city should kill a heifer, wash their hands over
it, and say: <q>Our hands have not shed this blood, neither
have our eyes seen it.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XXI, 1-8.</note> The rabbis then ask:
<q>How could the elders of a city ever be suspected of the crime of
murder?</q> and their reply is: <q>Even if they only failed to
provide the poor in their charge with the necessary food, and
he became a highway robber and murderer; or if they left
him without the necessary protection, and he fell a victim to
murderers, they are held responsible for the crime before the
higher court of God.</q><note place='foot'>Sifre ad loc.;
Sota IX, 7.</note> That is, according to our station we
are all responsible for the social conditions which create
<pb n='489'/><anchor id='Pg489'/>
poverty and crime, and it is our duty to establish such relations
between the individual and the community as will
remove the causes of all the evils of society.
</p>

<p>
11. This, in a way, anticipates the third maxim of Hillel:
<q>If not now, when then?</q> Judaism cannot accept the New
Testament spirit of other-worldliness, which prompted the
teaching: <q>Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat
or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body what ye shall
put on,</q> or <q>Resist not evil.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. VI,
25-28, V, 39; comp. Cor. VI, 6-7.</note> Such a view disregards
the values and duties of domestic, civic, and industrial life,
and creates an inseparable gulf between sacred and profane,
between religion and culture. In contrast to this, Jewish
ethics sets the highest value upon all things that make man
more of a human being and increase his power of doing good.
To Judaism marriage and home life are regarded as the normal
conditions of human welfare and sane morality, while celibacy
is considered abnormal.<note place='foot'>Yeb. 62 a, 63
a.</note> Labor establishes the dignity of
man,<note place='foot'>Prov. XXII, 29; Ned. 49 b.</note>
while wealth is a source of blessing, a stewardship in the
service of society.<note place='foot'>Ber. 8 a, ref. to Ps. CXXVIII, 2.</note>
In opposition to the practice fostered by
the Essenes and afterwards adopted by the early Church, of
devoting one's whole fortune to charity, the rabbis decreed
that one should not give over one fifth of one's
possessions.<note place='foot'>Keth. 50 a.</note>
As has well been said, Judaism teaches a <q>robust
morality.</q><note place='foot'>Morris Joseph in <hi rend='italic'>Religious
Systems of the World</hi>, 1892, p. 701.</note>
It regards life as a continual battle for God and right against
every sort of injustice,<note place='foot'>Deut. I, 17; see Schmiedl:
<hi rend='italic'>D. Lehre v. Kampf um's Recht</hi>, 1875.</note>
for truth against every kind of falsehood.
At the same time it fosters also the gentler virtues of
meekness,<note place='foot'>Ps. XXXVII, 11; Shab. 88 b.</note>
kindness to animals,<note place='foot'>Ex. XXIII, 5; Deut. XXV, 4;
Prov. XII, 10; Git. 62 a.</note> peaceableness and
modesty.<note place='foot'>Aboth. I, 12; IV, 4, 12; Taan. 20 b.</note>
</p>

<pb n='490'/><anchor id='Pg490'/>

<p>
12. Jewish ethics excels all other ethical systems, especially
in its insistence on purity and holiness. Not only is any
unchaste look, thought, or act condemned, exactly as in the
Sermon on the Mount,<note place='foot'>Matt. V. 17-30.</note>
as approaching adultery,<note place='foot'>Job XXXI, 1; Pes.
R. XXIV; Lev. R. XXIII, 12; Ber. 12 b; Nid. 13 a.</note> but all
profanity of act or speech is declared to be an unpardonable
offense against the majesty of God.<note place='foot'>Shab. 33 a,
referring to Isa. IX, 17; Ben Sira XXIII, 13; Test. Twelve
Patriarchs, <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.</note> Modesty in demeanor
and dress was both preached and practiced by the Jews
throughout the Middle Ages, while in non-Jewish circles
coarseness and lewdness prevailed among high and low, in
minstrel song and monastic life. <q>The Lord thy God walketh
in the midst of thy camp ... therefore shall thy camp
be holy, that He see no unseemly thing in thee, and turn away
from thee.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. XXIII, 14.</note>
These Biblical words created among the
Essenes (the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Zenuim</foreign>)
and later among the entire Jewish
people a spirit of chastity and modesty which made the
Jewish home of old a model of purity and sanctity. The
great problem for modern Israel, amid our present allurements
of luxury and pleasure, is to restore the home to its pristine
glory as a sanctuary of God, a training school for virtue, so
that its influence may extend over the whole of life.
</p>

<p>
13. Thus Jewish ethics derives its sanction from the idea
of a God of holiness. But it never made life austere, depriving
it of joy, or begrudging man his cheerfulness and laughter.
On the contrary, the Sabbath and many of the holy days are
seasons of joy, for gladness should bring the spirit of God
near to man.<note place='foot'>Deut. XVI, 11; 14 f.;
Shab. 118 a; Pes. R. XXIII; Meg. 16 b; Shab.
30 b; Ber. 31 a; comp. M. Lazarus, l. c., 254-261.</note>
Moreover, the Talmud holds that we should
encourage every means of promoting cheer among men. This
is illustrated by one of the popular legends of the prophet
Elijah, who told the saintly Rabbi Beroka, who prided himself
<pb n='491'/><anchor id='Pg491'/>
upon his austerity, that his companions in Paradise were
to be two jesters, because they cheered the depressed and
increased the joy in the world.<note place='foot'>Taan. 22 a.</note>
</p>

<p>
As a matter of fact, the Jewish ideal of holiness is all-inclusive.
It aims to hallow every pursuit and endeavor,
all social relations and activities, insisting only on a pure
motive and disinterested service. As the Ruler of life is the
source of all morality, so all of life should be made holy with
duty. Man becomes a child of God through his responsibility,
instead of remaining a mere product of the social forces
about him or of claiming self-sufficient sovereignty and refusing
to acknowledge a higher Will. Jewish ethics is autonomous,
because it insists on the divine spirit in
man.<note place='foot'>See Lazarus, l. c., 99.</note> As
we follow the divine Pattern of holiness, all that we have and
are, body and soul, weal and woe, wealth and want, pain and
pleasure, life and death, become stepping-stones on the road
to holiness and godliness. Life is like a ladder on which man
can rise from round to round, to come ever nearer to God on
high who beckons him toward ever higher ideals and achievements.
Man and humanity are thus given the potentiality
of infinite progress in every direction. Science and art,
industry and commerce, literature and law, every pursuit of
man comes within the scope of religion and ethics. For
God's kingdom of truth, righteousness and peace, as beheld
by Israel's seers of old, will be fully established on earth only
when all the forces of material, intellectual, and social life
have been unfolded, when all the prophetic ideals, the visions
and aspirations of all the seers of humanity have been realized,
and the Zion heights of human perfection have at last been
attained. <q>The wise have no rest, neither in this world nor
in the world to come, for it is said: <q>they go from strength
to strength, [until] they appear before God on
Zion.</q></q><note place='foot'>Ber. 64 a,
refer. to Ps. LXXXIV, 8; comp. Lazarus, l. c., p. 280.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='493'/><anchor id='Pg493'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>List Of Abbreviations</head>

<lg>
<l>A. d. R. N.    Aboth di Rabbi Nathan</l>
<l>A. T.          Altes Testament</l>
<l>Ab. Z.         Aboda Zarah</l>
<l>Ag.            Agada</l>
<l>Ann.           Annotations</l>
<l>Ant.           Antiquities (of Josephus)</l>
<l>Ap.            Apionem, contra</l>
<l>Apoc.          Apocalyptic</l>
<l>Arak.          Arakin</l>
<l>Art.           Article</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>B.             Babli (Babylonian)</l>
<l>b.             ben</l>
<l>B. B.          Baba Bathra</l>
<l>B. H.          Beth ha Midrash</l>
<l>B. K.          Baba Kamma</l>
<l>B. M.          Baba Metzia</l>
<l>Beitr.         Beitraege</l>
<l>Ber.           Berakoth</l>
<l>Bibl.          Bible or Biblical</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>C. C. A. R.    Central Conference of American Rabbis</l>
<l>Cant.          Canticles</l>
<l>Chron.         Chronicles</l>
<l>Ch.            Chapter</l>
<l>Comm.          Commentary, -ies</l>
<l>Comp.          Compare</l>
<l>Cor.           Corinthians, Epistle to</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dan.           Daniel</l>
<l>Deut.          Deuteronomy</l>
<l>Dict.          Dictionary</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eccl.          Ecclesiastes</l>
<l>Enc.           Encyclopedia</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 15'>(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) Brit. Britannia</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 15'>(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) R. a. Eth....  of Religion and Ethics</l>
<l>Ep.            Epistle</l>
<l>Eph.           Ephesians, Epistle to</l>
<l>Ethnol.        Ethnologische</l>
<l>Ex.            Exodus</l>
<l>Ez.            Ezekiel</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>G. J.          Geschichte der Juden (Graetz)</l>
<l>G. Jud.        Geschichte des Judenthums (Jost)</l>
<l>G. V. I.       Geschichte des Volkes Israel (Schuerer)</l>
<l>Gal.           Galatians, Epistle to</l>
<l>Gen.           Genesis</l>
<l>Ges. Abh.      Gesammelte Abhandlungen</l>
<l>Ges. Schrf.    Gesammelte Schriften</l>
<pb n='494'/><anchor id='Pg494'/>
<l>Gesch. u. Lit. Geschichte und Literature</l>
<l>Gottesd.       Gottesdienstliche</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>H.             Hilkoth</l>
<l>H. B.          Handbuch</l>
<l>H. J.          History of Jews (Graetz)</l>
<l>H. U. C.       Hebrew Union College</l>
<l>Hab.           Habakkuk</l>
<l>Hag.           Hagigah</l>
<l>Hist.          History</l>
<l>Hor.           Horayoth</l>
<l>Hul.           Hullin</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Introd.        Introduction</l>
<l>Isai.          Isaiah</l>
<l>Israel.        Israelitisch</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>J.             Journal</l>
<l>J. E.          Jewish Encyclopedia</l>
<l>J. Q. R.       Jewish Quarterly Review</l>
<l>J. W.          Jewish War (Josephus)</l>
<l>Jahrb.         Jahrbuch</l>
<l>Jer.           Jeremiah</l>
<l>Jew.           Jewish</l>
<l>Josh.          Joshua</l>
<l>Jud.           Judenthums</l>
<l>Judg.          Judges</l>
<l>Jued.          Juedisch</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>K. A. T.       <q>Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</q></l>
<l>Ker.           Kerithoth</l>
<l>Keth.          Kethuboth</l>
<l>Kil.           Kilayim</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>L.             Literature</l>
<l>l. c.          loco citato, the same place;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 15'>libro citato, the same book (for the usual o. c. = opere citato).</l>
<l>Lam.           Lamentations</l>
<l>Lev.           Leviticus</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>M. K.          Moed Katan</l>
<l>Macc.          Maccabees, Book of</l>
<l>Maim.          Maimonides</l>
<l>Mak.           Makkoth</l>
<l>Mal.           Malachi</l>
<l>Mas.           Masseketh</l>
<l>Meg.           Megillah</l>
<l>Mek.           Mekiltha</l>
<l>Men.           Menahoth</l>
<l>Mid.           Midrash</l>
<l>Mtschr.        Monatsschrift fuer Geschichte und Wissenschaft des Judenthums</l>
<l>Mitth.         Mittheilungen</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nachgel-Schr.  Nachgelassene Schriften</l>
<l>Neh.           Nehemiah</l>
<l>Nid.           Niddah</l>
<l>Numb.          Numbers</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>P. d. R. El.   Pirke di Rabbi Eliezer</l>
<l>Pars.          Parsisch</l>
<l>Pes.           Pesahim, -ee</l>
<l>Pes. R.        Pesikta Rabbathi</l>
<pb n='495'/><anchor id='Pg495'/>
<l>Pesik.         Pesikta di Rab Kahana</l>
<l>Phil.          Philosophy or Philosophical</l>
<l>Prov.          Proverbs</l>
<l>Prot.          Protestantisch</l>
<l>Ps.            Psalms</l>
<l>Psych.         Psychologisch</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quel.          Quellen</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>R.             Rabbah, also Rabbi, Rabban</l>
<l>R. h. Sh.      Rosh ha Shanah</l>
<l>R. W. B.       Real-Woerterbuch</l>
<l>ref.           referring or reference</l>
<l>Rel.           Religion</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>S. O.          Seder Olam</l>
<l>s. v.          sub verbo</l>
<l>Sam.           Samuel</l>
<l>Sanh.          Sanhedrin</l>
<l>Sh. A.         Shulhan Aruk</l>
<l>Shab.          Shabuoth</l>
<l>Sibyl.         Sibylline Books</l>
<l>Slav.          Slavonic</l>
<l>Soc.           Society</l>
<l>Stud.          Studien or Studies</l>
<l>Suk.           Sukkah</l>
<l>Syst.          System or Systematic</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>T. d. b. E.    Tanna di be Eliahu</l>
<l>Tanh.          Tanhuma</l>
<l>Teh.           Tehillim</l>
<l>Theol.         Theologisch</l>
<l>Tos.           Tosefta</l>
<l>Tosaf.         Tosafoth</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>u.             und or ueber</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>W. B.          Woerterbuch</l>
<l>Wiss.          Wissenschaft or Wissenschaftlich</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yalk.          Yalkut</l>
<l>Y. B.          Yearbook</l>
<l>Yeb.           Yebamoth</l>
<l>Yer.           Yerushalmi</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zech.          Zechariah</l>
<l>Zeitschr.      Zeitschrift</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='497'/><anchor id='Pg497'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index</head>

<lg>
<l>Aaronites, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-ab'/>
<l>Ab, Ninth of, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref>, <ref target='Pg469'>469</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abba Areka</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-rab'>Rab</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abbahu, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg422'>422</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abelson, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg422'>422</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ablat, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abraham, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> f., <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> f., <ref target='Pg417'>417</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abraham ben David of Posquieres, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-abraham-ibn-daud'/>
<l>Abraham ibn Daud, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-abraham-ibn-ezra'/>
<l>Abraham Ibn Ezra, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abrahams, Israel, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abravanel, Isaac, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abstinence</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-asceticism'>Asceticism</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abulafia, Abr., <ref target='Pg431'>431</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adam, <ref target='Pg222'>222-230</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>; heavenly, <ref target='Pg437'>437</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adonai, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref> f., <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Affliction, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ahha, R., <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ahriman, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Akiba, R., <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref> f., <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg467'>467</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albo, Joseph, <ref target='Pg024'>24-26</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> f., <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> f., <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, <ref target='Pg309'>309-339</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alenu, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, <ref target='Pg477'>477</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alfarabi, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allegory, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alpha and Omega, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Altruism, <ref target='Pg482'>482</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Am haaretz, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amos, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anaxoras, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angels, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180-188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anger</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-wrath'>Wrath</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Animals, <ref target='Pg489'>489</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anselm of Canterbury, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthropology, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthropomorphism, <ref target='Pg074'>74-76</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antigonos of Soko, <ref target='Pg480'>480</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antinomian, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antoninus, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>, <ref target='Pg422'>422</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apicoros&mdash;Epicurean, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apocalyptic books, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> f. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> f., <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apocryphal books, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apologetics, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostate, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg424'>424</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostles, <ref target='Pg435'>435</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostolic convention, <ref target='Pg436'>436</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aquilas, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arelim, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristeas, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristotelian, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristotle, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnold, Matthew, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Art, <ref target='Pg480'>480</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Articles of faith, <ref target='Pg019'>19-28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aryan, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-asceticism'/>
<l>Asceticism, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg490'>490</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asenath, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assimilation, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atheism, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atonement, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atonement, Day of, <ref target='Pg466'>466-469</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attributes of God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aub, Joseph, <ref target='Pg446'>446</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Autonomy of morality, <ref target='Pg491'>491</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Azazel, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg466'>466</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Azkarah, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonian, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacher, W., <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bahya ben Asher, <ref target='Pg486'>486</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bahya b. Joseph ibn Pakudah, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg473'>473</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banquet of the pious in the future, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-baptism'/>
<l>Baptism, <ref target='Pg417'>417</ref>, <ref target='Pg436'>436</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bar Kochba, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='498'/><anchor id='Pg498'/>

<lg>
<l>Bathing</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-baptism'>Baptism</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bath Kol, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beck, L., <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beecher, W. J., <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belief, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='index-faith'>Faith</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ben Azzai, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>, <ref target='Pg480'>480</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ben Sira, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, and elsewhere</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ben Zoma, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benedictions, Eighteen, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benevolence, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg485'>485</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bentwich, N., <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bergson, H., <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernays, J., <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beroka, R., <ref target='Pg490'>490</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berosus, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bertholet, A., <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beruria, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bezold, C., <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biblical canon, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bloch, M., <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bloch, Ph., <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blood, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Body, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boeklen, E., <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bousset, W., <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> f., <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref> f., <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> f., <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breath of life, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brugsch, H., <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddha, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>, <ref target='Pg478'>478</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cabbalah, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, <ref target='Pg473'>473</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calendar, Jewish, <ref target='Pg460'>460</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calvin, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caro, Joseph, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassel, D., <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg489'>489</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celibacy, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceremonies, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg449'>449</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charles, R. H., <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheerfulness, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg490'>490</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheyne, T. K., <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian Science, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian theology, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> f., <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-christian-trinity'/>
<l>Christian trinity, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref> f., <ref target='Pg441'>441</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christianity, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christianity, Paulinian, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christ(os), <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg433'>433</ref>, <ref target='Pg437'>437</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Church's providential mission, <ref target='Pg444'>444</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circumcision, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref>, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref>, <ref target='Pg449'>449</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Civilization, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clemens, Flavius, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cohen, Hermann, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commerce, Jewish, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Compassion of God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Compassion of man, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Condescension of God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confession, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confirmation, <ref target='Pg449'>449</ref>, <ref target='Pg463'>463</ref>, <ref target='Pg473'>473</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confucius, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>, <ref target='Pg478'>478</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conscience, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Consciousness, Man's, of God, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Continuity of soul</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-immortality'>Immortality</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Continuity with the past, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conversion, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref>, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cosmogony, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cosmology, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cosmos, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Covenant, God's, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157-161</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235-270</ref>, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creation, <ref target='Pg147'>147-153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creative principles, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Credo, <ref target='Pg022'>22-25</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crescas, Hasdai, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> f., <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> f., <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Critical research of Bible</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-historical'>Historical research</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cross, <ref target='Pg438'>438</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Culture, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curtiss, S. I., <ref target='Pg454'>454</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cuzari</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-jehuda-ha-levi'>Jehuda ha Levi</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyrus, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dama ben Nethina, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daniel, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darwin, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>David, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>David ben Zimra, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davidson, A. B., <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref> f., <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> f., <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Day of judgment, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Day of the Lord</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-jhvh-day'>JHVH, Day of</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Death, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deism, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delitzsch, Fried., <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dembitz, L. N., <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demons, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Descartes, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Determinism, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deutero-Isaiah, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dietary laws, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dillmann, A., <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> f., <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doctrine, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doellinger, J. J. I. v., <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='499'/><anchor id='Pg499'/>

<lg>
<l>Dorner, A., <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dosithean, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Draper, J. W., <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drummond, J., <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref> f., <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dualism, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> f., <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg438'>438</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dubno, S., <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duran, Simon, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duty, <ref target='Pg478'>478</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duty to fellow man, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg484'>484</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duty to self, <ref target='Pg482'>482</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecclesiastical, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecstasy, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edom&mdash;Rome, <ref target='Pg430'>430</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Einhorn, David, viii, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg446'>446</ref>, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref> f., <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elbogen, I., <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eleazar ben Pedath, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Election of Israel</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-israel'>Israel</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eliezer ben Hyrcanos, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elijah, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elisha ben Abuyah, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elohim, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> f., <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> f., <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emden, Jacob, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enoch, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eschatology</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-future-life'>Future life</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eschelbacher, J., <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Essenes, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref>, <ref target='Pg434'>434</ref>, <ref target='Pg481'>481</ref>, <ref target='Pg489'>489</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eternity, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethics, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref>, <ref target='Pg477'>477</ref>, <ref target='Pg491'>491</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euken, R., <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evil, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evil, Spirits of, <ref target='Pg189'>189-196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evolution, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exile, Babylonian, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> f., <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ezekiel, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> f., <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ezra, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> f., <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-faith'/>
<l>Faith, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faithfulness of God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faithfulness of Israel</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-israel'>Israel</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Falashas, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Family life, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fasting, <ref target='Pg483'>483</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fate, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fatherhood of God, <ref target='Pg256'>256-260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fear of God, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feast of Weeks</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-shabuoth'>Shabuoth</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Felsenthal, B., <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Festivals, <ref target='Pg461'>461-470</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finality, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finkelscherer, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flesh, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Formalism, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg473'>473</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foster, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frankel, Z., <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frederick II, <ref target='Pg444'>444</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freedom of will, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref> f., <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Friedlander, G., <ref target='Pg438'>438</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Friendship, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-future-life'/>
<l>Future life, <ref target='Pg281'>281-308</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gabirol, Solomon Ibn, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gamaliel, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gehenna, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geiger, Abraham, viii, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg446'>446</ref>, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref>, <ref target='Pg472'>472</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genius, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ger, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref> ff.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='index-proselyte'>Proselyte</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gershom ben Jehuda, <ref target='Pg472'>472</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gersonides, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ginzberg, Asher, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gnosticism, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-god'/>
<l>God, <ref target='Pg052'>52-145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God no abstraction, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God of the fathers, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-gods'/>
<l>God's, condescension, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142-144</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>essence, <ref target='Pg072'>72-81</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eternity, <ref target='Pg098'>98-100</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>existence, <ref target='Pg064'>64-71</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>faithfulness, <ref target='Pg134'>134-137</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fatherhood, <ref target='Pg256'>256-260</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foreknowledge, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goodness, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>grace, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref> f., <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> f.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holiness, <ref target='Pg100'>100-109</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> f.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>immanence, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref> f., <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incorporeality</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-spirituality'>Spirituality</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>jealousy, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>justice, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kingdom</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-kingdom'>Kingdom of God</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knowledge, <ref target='Pg138'>138-141</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mercy, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>names, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>omnipotence, <ref target='Pg091'>91-95</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>omnipresence, <ref target='Pg096'>96-98</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>omniscience, <ref target='Pg093'>93-95</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personality, <ref target='Pg073'>73-76</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relation to the world, <ref target='Pg146'>146-151</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>self-consciousness, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
<pb n='500'/><anchor id='Pg500'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spirit, <ref target='Pg097'>97-200</ref>; in man, <ref target='Pg216'>216-230</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spirituality, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74-78</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supermundaneity, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transcendence, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref> f., <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>truthfulness, <ref target='Pg134'>134-137</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unity, <ref target='Pg082'>82-90</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> f., <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wisdom, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> f.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wrath and punishment, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God-childship, Man's, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God-consciousness, Man's, <ref target='Pg029'>29-31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gods, Heathen, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goel, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gog and Magog, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Golden rule, <ref target='Pg484'>484</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goldziher, I., <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg441'>441</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goodness, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goy, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grace of God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Graetz, H., <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref>, <ref target='Pg472'>472</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greek church, <ref target='Pg429'>429</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ethics, <ref target='Pg443'>443</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>philosophy, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref> f., <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> f., <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wisdom, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gressmann, H., <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guedemann, M., <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guttmann, J., <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Habakkuk, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haftarah, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haggada and Halakah, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hananel, R., <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haninah ben Dosa, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hanukkah, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harnack, A., <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harper, R. F., <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hartmann, E. v., <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hasidim and Hasidean, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> f., <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg481'>481</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hatred, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heathenism, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> f., <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref> f., <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebrew, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg470'>470</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helbo, R., <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helen of Adiabene, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hellenism, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hellenistic Judaism, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg414'>414</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>literature, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>philosophy, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>propaganda, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> f., <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref> f., <ref target='Pg436'>436</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herford, R. T., <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hezekiah, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hillel, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref>, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref>, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref>, <ref target='Pg481'>481</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hillel, R., <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hillul and Kiddush hashem, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hirsch, E. G., <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg458'>458</ref>, <ref target='Pg480'>480</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hirsch, Samson Raphael, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hirsch, S. A., <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hirsch, Samuel, viii, <ref target='Pg446'>446</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-historical'/>
<l>Historical research, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hochmuth, A., <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holdheim, Samuel, viii, <ref target='Pg462'>462</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holiness, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg477'>477</ref> f., <ref target='Pg491'>491</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holiness, God's</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holiness, Levitical, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holy Land</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-palestine'>Palestine</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holy spirit, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horowitz, S., <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> f., <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horwitz, Sabbathai, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hosea, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref> f., <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humanity, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Husik, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> f., <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibn Daud</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-abraham-ibn-daud'>Abraham ibn Daud</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibn Ezra</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-abraham-ibn-ezra'>Abraham Ibn Ezra</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibn Sina, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibn Verga, <ref target='Pg431'>431</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ihering, R. v., <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Imitatio Dei, <ref target='Pg477'>477</ref>, <ref target='Pg479'>479</ref>, <ref target='Pg490'>490</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immanence of God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-immortality'/>
<l>Immortality, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Individual man, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Industry, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inspiration, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Institution of the synagogue</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-synagogue'>Synagogue</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intercession, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref> f., <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intermarriage, <ref target='Pg444'>444</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intermediary powers, <ref target='Pg197'>197-205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Internationalism, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intolerance, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaac ben Shesheth, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaac Napaha, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaiah, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ishmael, <ref target='Pg430'>430</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-islam'/>
<l>Islam, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> f., <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref>, <ref target='Pg441'>441</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Islam's mission, <ref target='Pg444'>444</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-israel'/>
<l>Israel, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref> f., <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Israel's, characteristics, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref> f.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>commerce, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecration, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>election, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323-330</ref></l>
<pb n='501'/><anchor id='Pg501'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hope, <ref target='Pg378'>378-391</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392-396</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>martyrdom, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367-377</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mission, <ref target='Pg328'>328-341</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352-354</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>cultural, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priesthood, <ref target='Pg342'>342-343</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prophetic genius, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>relation to the nations, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397-407</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>separateness, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> f., <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>, <ref target='Pg445'>445</ref> f., <ref target='Pg452'>452</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>world-duty, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>JHVH&mdash;Jahveh, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-jhvh-day'/>
<l>JHVH, Day of, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James, Wm., <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jastrow, J., <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jastrow, Morris, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jealousy of God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-jehuda-ha-levi'/>
<l>Jehuda ha Levi, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg426'>426</ref>, <ref target='Pg431'>431</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jehuda ha Nasi, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jellinek, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jeremiah, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerusalem, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jesus of Nazareth, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg433'>433</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jew and Jewry, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> f., <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jew hatred, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jewish nationality, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jewish religion</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-judaism'>Judaism</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Job, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref>, <ref target='Pg484'>484</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joel, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joel, D., <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joel, M., <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johanan, R., <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johanan ben Zakkai, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John the Baptist, <ref target='Pg434'>434</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John Hyrcanus, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jonah, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jose, R., <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joseph Ibn Zaddik, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joseph, Morris, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref>, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref> f., <ref target='Pg458'>458</ref>, <ref target='Pg489'>489</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Josephus, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref> f., <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref>, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joshua ben Hananiah, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg422'>422</ref>, <ref target='Pg432'>432</ref>, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref>, <ref target='Pg455'>455</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jost, M., <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joy of life, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg490'>490</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juda Ibn Balag, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judæo-Christians, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref> f., <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-judaism'/>
<l>Judaism, Modern or progressive, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>, <ref target='Pg422'>422</ref>, <ref target='Pg445'>445</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judaism, Rabbinic, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judan, R., <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justice, <ref target='Pg118'>118-124</ref>, <ref target='Pg485'>485</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justice, Social, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg487'>487</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaddish, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kant, Immanuel, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karaites, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaufmann, David, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> f., <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> f., <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kedusha, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kiddush hashem, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-kingdom'/>
<l>Kingdom of God, <ref target='Pg331'>331-341</ref>, <ref target='Pg491'>491</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Klein, J., <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref>, <ref target='Pg436'>436</ref>, <ref target='Pg482'>482</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knowledge of God, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knowledge, God's</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koeberle, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koheleth, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kohler, K., <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>, <ref target='Pg438'>438</ref>, <ref target='Pg447'>447</ref>, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kohler, M. J., <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kohut, Alex., <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Krauskopf, J., <ref target='Pg443'>443</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kremer, A. v., <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kuenen, A., <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Labor, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lame and blind parable, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Landsberg, M., <ref target='Pg473'>473</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lange, F. A., <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lauterbach, J. Z., <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref>, <ref target='Pg482'>482</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg486'>486</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Law, <ref target='Pg045'>45-47</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355-358</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lazarus, L., <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lazarus, M., <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg477'>477</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lecky, W. E. H., <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>, <ref target='Pg443'>443</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leo Hebraeus, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leo da Modena, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lessing, E. G., <ref target='Pg430'>430</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Levi, R., <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Levkovits, M., <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Life a battle, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loew, Leopold, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg472'>472</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loewe ben Bezalel, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-logos'/>
<l>Logos, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Love, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> f., <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126-131</ref>, <ref target='Pg484'>484</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Love, God's</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loyalty to country, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luria, Isaac, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luther, Martin, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luz, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luzzatto, S. D., <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='502'/><anchor id='Pg502'/>

<lg>
<l>Maimonides, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> f., <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> f., <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref> f., <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref> f., <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref>, <ref target='Pg426'>426</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Makom, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malachi, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Man, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206-232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Man, child of God, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Man's, brotherhood, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dual nature, <ref target='Pg212'>212-217</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>destiny and origin, <ref target='Pg218'>218-230</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fall, <ref target='Pg221'>221-225</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>freedom of will, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231-237</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>individuality, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perfectibility, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg491'>491</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>self-consciousness, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manasseh, King, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manasseh ben Israel, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mankind, <ref target='Pg310'>310-315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Margolis, Max, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-martyrdom'/>
<l>Martyrdom of Israel</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-israel'>Israel</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mazdaism</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-persian'>Persian</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Measure for measure, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medieval Jewry, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref> f., <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>, <ref target='Pg455'>455</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meir, R., <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>, <ref target='Pg450'>450</ref>, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Memra</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-logos'>Logos</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mendelssohn, M., vii, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mercy of God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merkabah, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Messianic hope, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref> f., <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg445'>445</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Messianic kingdom, <ref target='Pg426'>426</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Messiah, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref> f., <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref> f., <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metaphysical, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metatron&mdash;Mithras, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Micah, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Microcosm, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mielziner, M., <ref target='Pg446'>446</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mill, John Stuart, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milton, J., <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minim&mdash;Heretics, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg424'>424</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miracle, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160-166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Misanthropy, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mission of Israel</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-israel'>Israel</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Modesty, <ref target='Pg490'>490</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mohammed, <ref target='Pg429'>429</ref> f., <ref target='Pg441'>441</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mohammedan religion</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-islam'>Islam</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-mohammedan'/>
<l>Mohammedan theology, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monotheism, <ref target='Pg055'>55-183</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Absolute, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ethical, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montefiore, Claude G., <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>, <ref target='Pg438'>438</ref>, <ref target='Pg449'>449</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Month, <ref target='Pg459'>459</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moral order, <ref target='Pg119'>119-123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morgenstern, J., <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mosaic code, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg414'>414</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cult, <ref target='Pg263'>263-268</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>law, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mosaism, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moses, <ref target='Pg035'>35-37</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref> f., <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mueller, Max, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mutuality, <ref target='Pg488'>488</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mysticism and mystics, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg473'>473</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naaman, <ref target='Pg414'>414</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nahmanides, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg426'>426</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nahum of Gimzo, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Names of God, <ref target='Pg058'>58-63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nationalism, Jewish, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> f., <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nationality, Jewish, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nature, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nature's laws, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neoplatonism, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nestorians, <ref target='Pg443'>443</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-nether-world'/>
<l>Nether world, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='index-sheol'>Sheol</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neumark, David, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Year's Day, <ref target='Pg465'>465-468</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nieto, David, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nirvana, <ref target='Pg479'>479</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noah, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg452'>452</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noahitic laws, <ref target='Pg048'>48-51</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref>, <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref> f., <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nomism, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nomos&mdash;Law, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oath, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Objective and subjective truths, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Œnomaos of Gadara, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Onias the Saint, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ontological proof</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-gods'>God's existence</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Optimism, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Order, Moral, of the world, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orientalism, <ref target='Pg470'>470</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Origin, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orthodoxy, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Otherworldliness, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref>, <ref target='Pg440'>440</ref>, <ref target='Pg489'>489</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='503'/><anchor id='Pg503'/>

<lg>
<l>Pain, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-palestine'/>
<l>Palestine, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pantheism, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paradise legend, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parseeism</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-persian'>Persian</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Particularism, <ref target='Pg446'>446</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Passover, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patriotism, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul and Paulinian dogma, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> f., <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg417'>417</ref>, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref>, <ref target='Pg437'>437</ref>, <ref target='Pg440'>440</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peace, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg491'>491</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pentecost miracle, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perles, F., <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-persian'/>
<l>Persian, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184-191</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Personality of God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pessimism, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pharaoh, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pharisaic and Pharisees, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> f., <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> f., <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref> f., <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref>, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref>, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philanthropy, <ref target='Pg486'>486</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philippson, Ludwig, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg444'>444</ref>, <ref target='Pg446'>446</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philipson, David, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg446'>446</ref>, <ref target='Pg458'>458</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philo, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> f., <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> f., <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref>, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref>, <ref target='Pg452'>452</ref>, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref>, <ref target='Pg485'>485</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philosophy, Greek, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hindoo, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Jewish, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philosophy of religion, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phineas ben Yair, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phylacteries</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-tefillin'>Tefillin</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plato, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref> f., <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Platonism, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ploss, H., <ref target='Pg449'>449</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porter, F. Ch., <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayer, <ref target='Pg261'>261-277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Predetermination, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Preëxistence of the Soul, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priest, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priest code, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priest, High, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg466'>466</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priesthood of Israel</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-israel'>Israel</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Profanation of name</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Hillul ha Shem</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Propaganda, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg412'>412-419</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-prophecy'/>
<l>Prophecy, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophetic books, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-proselyte'/>
<l>Proselyte, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> f., <ref target='Pg411'>411-423</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Protestantism, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Providence, <ref target='Pg167'>167-175</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Psalmist, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>,<ref target='Pg480'>480</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Psychology, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ptolemy Philadelphus, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Punishment, Divine</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-retribution'>Retribution</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purgatory, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purim, <ref target='Pg470'>470</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purity, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg490'>490</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pythagoras, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-rab'/>
<l>Rab-Abba Areka, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rabba, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rabbinism, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Radin, M., <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rashi, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rationalism, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg450'>450</ref>, <ref target='Pg474'>474</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rauwenhoff, L. W. E., <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Redemption, Religion of, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reform Judaism, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reform liturgy, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg469'>469</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reformation, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg444'>444</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reizenstein, R., <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religion, Absolute, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religion's unifying power, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg491'>491</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Repentance, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Responsibility, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> f., <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg488'>488-491</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resurrection, <ref target='Pg282'>282-285</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref> f., <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-retribution'/>
<l>Retribution, <ref target='Pg107'>107-111</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revelation, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reward and punishment</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-retribution'>Retribution</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhode, E., <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ritschl, A. B., <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ritualism, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roman church, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rome, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rosenau, Wm., <ref target='Pg447'>447</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rosin, D., <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ruth, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg417'>417</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saadia, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabbath, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg455'>455-460</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sachs, M., <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrament, <ref target='Pg448'>448</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifice, <ref target='Pg261'>261-270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sadduceeism and Sadducees, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> f., <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>, <ref target='Pg434'>434</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref>, <ref target='Pg456'>456</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salvation, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samaritans, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref>, <ref target='Pg454'>454</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samuel, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samuel of Nehardea, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanctification of the name, <ref target='Pg484'>484</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Satan, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189-195</ref>, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='504'/><anchor id='Pg504'/>

<lg>
<l>Schechter, S., <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>, <ref target='Pg455'>455</ref>, <ref target='Pg458'>458</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scheyer, S., <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schiller, Fr., <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schlesinger, W. and L., <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schmiedl, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> f., <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schreiber, E., <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schreiner, M., <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg431'>431</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schuerer, E., <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref>, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref>, <ref target='Pg448'>448</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schulman, S., <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>, <ref target='Pg445'>445</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Science, Modern, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> f., <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scripture, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seeberg, A., <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref>, <ref target='Pg436'>436</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sefiroth, Ten, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Self-conquest, <ref target='Pg483'>483</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Self-elevation <hi rend='italic'>versus</hi> self-extinction, <ref target='Pg479'>479</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seligman, C., <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semikah, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semites and Semitic, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sermon on the Mount, <ref target='Pg438'>438</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serpent, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Servant of the Lord, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367-375</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seventy languages, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seventy nations, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>, <ref target='Pg464'>464</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-shabuoth'/>
<l>Shabuoth&mdash;Feast of the Weeks, <ref target='Pg462'>462</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shaddai, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shammai and Shammaite, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shekinah, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shema, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg426'>426</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-sheol'/>
<l>Sheol, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> f.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='index-nether-world'>Nether world</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siegfried, C., <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> f., <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simeon ben Eleazar, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simeon ben Gamaliel, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simeon ben Lakish, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simeon ben Shetach, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simeon ben Yohai, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simhat Torah, <ref target='Pg464'>464</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simlai, R., <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simon the Just, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin, <ref target='Pg231'>231-345</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin, Original, <ref target='Pg221'>221-223</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinai, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slavery, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, W. R., <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sociability, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Social justice, <ref target='Pg487'>487</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Society, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socrates, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solomon ben Adret, <ref target='Pg426'>426</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soul, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> f., <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spiegel, F., <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spinoza, B., <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirit of God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirit, Holy, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-spirituality'/>
<l>Spirituality of God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spitta, F., <ref target='Pg434'>434</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stade, B., <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stanley, A. P., <ref target='Pg454'>454</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>State, Duty to the, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stave, E., <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stein, L., <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Steinschneider, M., <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg430'>430</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Steinthal, H., <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stoics, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stranger, <ref target='Pg408'>408-411</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strauss, D. F., <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> f., <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> f., <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> f., <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref> f., <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> f., <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suffering, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suffering, Israel's</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-martyrdom'>Martyrdom</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suicide, <ref target='Pg484'>484</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-sukkoth'/>
<l>Sukkoth festival, <ref target='Pg463'>463</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sunday, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref> f., <ref target='Pg459'>459</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Symbolum Apostolicum, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synagogal liturgy and worship, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, 514</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-synagogue'/>
<l>Synagogue, <ref target='Pg447'>447</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synagogue, Men of the Great, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tabernacles, Feast of</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-sukkoth'>Sukkoth</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taëb, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tallith, <ref target='Pg454'>454</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tamar, <ref target='Pg417'>417</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-tefillin'/>
<l>Tefillin, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teleological proof</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-gods'>God's existence</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temple, Destruction of</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-ab'>Ab, Ninth of</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teshubah</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Repentance Theism, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theocracy, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theology, <ref target='Pg001'>1-6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theology, Christian, <ref target='Pg005'>5-6</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theology, Mohammedan</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-mohammedan'>Mohammedan</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>This-worldliness, Jewish, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg477'>477</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tihamat, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Time, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torah, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42-47</ref>, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torah, Reading from the, <ref target='Pg470'>470</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toy, C. H., <ref target='Pg480'>480</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tradition, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transcendentalism, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='505'/><anchor id='Pg505'/>

<lg>
<l>Trinity</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-christian-trinity'>Christian trinity</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trumbull, H. Clay, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Truth, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Truthfulness of God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tylor, E. B., <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg449'>449</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unifying power, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unity of God, <ref target='Pg082'>82-90</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of man, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref> f.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the cosmos, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Univeralism, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref>, <ref target='Pg445'>445</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Universe, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Values of life, <ref target='Pg489'>489</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vernacular, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virtue, Hereditary, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref>, <ref target='Pg489'>489</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vision, Prophetic</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-prophecy'>Prophecy</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Water libation, <ref target='Pg464'>464</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weber, F., <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weiss, Isaac Hirsch, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wells, H. G., <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>White, Andrew D., <ref target='Pg443'>443</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Will, Freedom of, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> f., <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Windelband-Tufts, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> ff., <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Windishman, Fr., <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wisdom, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wisdom of God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wisdom, Book of, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wisdom literature, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wise, Isaac M., <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref>, <ref target='Pg473'>473</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woman, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg472'>472</ref> f.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>World, Infinitude of, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Moral government of, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref> f.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Order of, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worlds, Two, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-wrath'/>
<l>Wrath of God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-god'>God</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wuensche, A., <ref target='Pg430'>430</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xenophanes, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yavan, <ref target='Pg424'>424</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yethro, <ref target='Pg417'>417</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yezer ha ra and ha tob, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zealot, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zebulon and Issachar, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zechariah, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref>, <ref target='Pg464'>464</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zedakah, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg486'>486</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zekuth Aboth, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeller, E., <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zerubbabel, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zidduk ha Din, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zimmels, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zimmern, H., <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zionism, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zizith, <ref target='Pg454'>454</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zoroastrianism</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='index-persian'>Persian</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zunz, Leopold, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg450'>450</ref>, <ref target='Pg471'>471</ref></l>
</lg>

</div>


<pb n='507'/><anchor id='Pg507'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>

<p>
The following pages contain advertisements of a
few of the Macmillan books on kindred subjects.
</p>

<pb n='509'/><anchor id='Pg509'/>

<p>
Zionism and the Jewish Future
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>BY VARIOUS WRITERS</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Edited by Harry Sacher</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cloth, 12mo, $1.00</hi></l>
</lg>

<p>
<q>This volume should be read by Zionists so that they should become more familiar
with what even some of them know more or less imperfectly. It should be carefully
perused by non- and anti-Zionists so that they may become informed with a subject
which many of them are inclined to censure without any knowledge of that which they
are censuring.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>B'na B'rith Messenger.</hi>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Zionism and the Jewish Future</q> is one of the most illuminating of all the serious-minded
books of the year. If we belonged to the Hebrew race we would first master all
that is said about Palestine and the movement to restore it to a living place among the
Nations. Next, we would go to the Great Jewish Encyclopedia, and look up everything
connected with the subject,&mdash;also the fifteen or more writers who have made this book.
Lastly, if we agreed with the movement, we would get in line at once. Note in especial
the bibliography of the whole matter (Appendix 4).</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Zionism looks <q>forward, not backward,</q> and the vast hope behind it is one that will
help the non-Jewish world as much as the children of Abraham. May Israel yet have a
Hebrew University in Jerusalem. They are right&mdash;these idealists. Palestine <q>is essentially
the land of religious influences and spiritual association,</q> and also of <q>political and
geographical importance.</q> The problems in all this are fairly met and fully discussed in
this book, which Dr. H. Sacher edits.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And how is the Gentile to approach the subject? With a perfectly open mind on
all its economic, historical and religious questions. If taken up in this way the book
grows on one; it presents wholly reasonable aspirations which all right-minded people
can endorse and will desire to aid as far as practicable. To have a <q>perfectly open
mind</q> is to take up the problems of these earnest people who discuss <q>Zionism</q> as our
friends, our neighbors, our fellow-workers. Don't be <q>tolerant</q> or patronizing towards
Jew or Gentile, American, European, Asiatic, African or Islander. We are <q>all of one
blood.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>One of the best of Californian novelists, who has enjoyed the book, writes as
follows:</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><q>It is an excellent round-up and exposition of all the vagrant&mdash;and vague&mdash;theories
and history of the subject. It makes the evolution and logical being of the
question perfectly clear. Whereas in most Jewish minds Zionism means a belief in
Palestine as the native soil of all Jews and the refuge for the oppressed, the motive here
expressed is that by drawing the Jewish soul to its ancient Fatherland, it will create a
spiritual center for all Jewry.</q></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Daily Fresno Republican.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>The Macmillan Company</l>
<l>Publishers  64-66 Fifth Avenue   New York</l>
</lg>

<pb n='510'/><anchor id='Pg510'/>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Jewish Philanthropy</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>An Exposition Of Principles And Methods Of
Jewish Social Service In The United States</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>By Boris D. Bogen, Ph.D.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cloth, 12mo, $2.00</hi></l>
</lg>

<p>
This book is an attempt to meet the demand on the part
of those who are engaged in or are interested in Jewish social
service, for a statement of the principles evolved through
the experience of the last two decades in various philanthropic
efforts of the Jews of this country. It is primarily
a compilation of the different ideas expressed by the leaders
of the movements, as well as a presentation of the actual
practical experiences that were met in the different lines of
philanthropic activity.
</p>

<p>
As the first attempt in this direction the work will render
a great service in clarifying the indefinite views in vogue at
present among Jewish Social workers.
</p>

<p>
Contents
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Introduction</hi>&mdash;The Extent and Scope of Jewish Philanthropy.
Dependency Among Jews. Charity Among Jews. National
Organizations. Methods of Fund Raising for Jewish Philanthropic
Agencies. Transients. The Immigration Problem.
Distribution. The Back to the Soil Movement. Resident-Dependents.
Dependent Women and Children. Insufficiency of
Income. Standards of Relief. Education and Social Organizations.
The Education of Immigrants. Jewish Settlements and
Neighborhood Work. Organization and Administration. Volunteer
Service. Administration. The Federation and the Synagogue.
Bibliography. Index.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>The Macmillan Company</l>
<l>Publishers  64-66 Fifth Avenue  New York</l>
</lg>

<pb n='511'/><anchor id='Pg511'/>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>A History of Mediaeval Jewish Philosophy</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>By Isaac Husik</hi>
</p>

<p>
Assistant Professor of Philosophy in the University of Pennsylvania
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cloth, octavo, l + 452 pages, $3.00</hi></l>
</lg>

<p>
The first complete history of mediæval Jewish rationalistic
philosophy for both the student and the general reader
which has as yet been written in any modern tongue.
</p>

<p>
The story is told simply and interestingly. Dr. Husik
is gifted with the faculty of clear insight and he has succeeded
in grasping and in exhibiting in a very readable
manner the essential nature of the various problems treated
and the gist of the solutions offered by the different Jewish
philosophers discussed. The author has not attempted to
read into the mediæval thinkers modern ideas which
were foreign to them. He has endeavored to interpret
their ideas from their own point of view as determined by
their history and environment, and the literary sources,
religious and philosophical, under the influence of which
they came. It is an objective and not too critical exposition
of Jewish rationalistic thought in the middle ages.
</p>

<p>
In the words of an eminent reviewer, <q>To have compressed
a comprehensive discussion of five centuries of
earnest and productive thought upon the greatest of
themes into a book of less than four hundred and fifty
pages is an achievement upon which any author may be
congratulated. To have done the work so well and in
particular to have expressed profound reflections upon
abstruse problems in a style so limpid, so fluent, so readily
understood is to have placed all who are interested in
thought and thinkers under great obligation. That an
American-Jewish scholar should have produced a pioneer
work that must, for a long time to come, be the authority
in its field is a subject of felicitation to all who have at
heart the perpetuation of Jewish learning in America.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l>The Macmillan Company</l>
<l>Publishers  64-66 Fifth Avenue  New York</l>
</lg>

<pb n='512'/><anchor id='Pg512'/>

<p>
Studies in Judaism
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>By Rabbi Solomon Schechter, Litt.D.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The author is President of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America
since 1902; formerly Reader in Talmudic, Cambridge University, and Professor
of Hebrew, University College of London, 1898-1902.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cloth, 12mo, 366 pages, $1.50</hi></l>
</lg>

<p>
<q>The book is, to our mind, the best on this subject ever written.
The author condenses a literature of several thousand pages into
564 pages, and presents to us his history in a splendid English and
splendid order. This work deserves the highest appreciation, and
without the slightest hesitation do we recommend it to the public at
large, and more especially to our co-religionists in this country.</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>&mdash;Jewish Tribune.</hi></l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Contents</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Introduction.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Chassidim.</hi>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nachman Krochmal and the <q>Perplexities of the Time.</q></hi>
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Rabbi Elijah Wilna, Gaon.</hi>
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nachmanides.</hi>
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='smallcaps'>A Jewish Boswell.</hi>
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Dogmas of Judaism.</hi>
</p>

<p>
7. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The History of Jewish Tradition.</hi>
</p>

<p>
8. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Doctrine of Divine Retribution in Rabbinical Literature.</hi>
</p>

<p>
9. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Law and Recent Criticism.</hi>
</p>

<p>
10. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Hebrew Collection of the British Museum.</hi>
</p>

<p>
11. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Titles of Jewish Books.</hi>
</p>

<p>
12. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Child in Jewish Literature.</hi>
</p>

<p>
13. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Woman in Temple and Synagogue.</hi>
</p>

<p>
14. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Earliest Jewish Community in Europe.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Notes.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Index.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>The Macmillan Company</l>
<l>Publishers  64-66  Fifth Avenue  New York</l>
</lg>
</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
